 ThestellarhalooftheMilkyWayhasanumberofdistinctive characteristics which make it a key probe of galaxy formatio n processes. Milky Way halo stars have low metallicity alpha element enhancement a high degree of support from random motions and a roughly rpower law distribution in an oblate halo Eggen LyndenBell Sandage Chiba Beers Yanny et al. Larsen Humphreys Lemon etal.NewbergYannyJuri cetal.. Thelow metallicities and alpha element enhancements suggest that the starsformedrelativelyearlyinthehistoryoftheUniverse. Yet there has been disagreement about where these stars formed did they form in situin the early phases of the collapse of the MilkyWay e.g.EggenLyndenBell Sandageordid the stars form outside the Milky Way in satellite galaxies on ly to be accreted by the Milky Way at a later date e.g. Searle Zinn Bullock Kratsov Weinberg Bullock JohnstonAbadiNavarro Steinmetz A keydiscriminantbetweenthese picturesisthestructureo fthe stellar halo. In situformationwould predict relativelylittle substructureastheformationepochwasmanydynamicaltim es ago. Incontrastcurrentmodelsofgalaxyformationinahie rar chicalcontextpredictthat the vast majorityof stellar hal ostars should be accreted from disrupted satellite galaxies John ston Bullock Kratsov Weinberg Bullock John ston Abadi Navarro Steinmetz . The accumu lated debris from ancient accretion episodes rapidly dispe rses inreal spacealthoughin phasespacesomeinformationabo ut initial conditions persists e.g. Helmi White for m inga relativelysmoothstellar halo. Thedebrisfromaccret ions in the last few Gyr can remain in relatively distinct structu res. Simulations predict quite a wide range in lumpiness of ste l lar halos with a general expectationof a signicant amount of recognisable halo substructure Bullock Kratsov Weinb erg Bullock Johnston. Consequently a number of groups have searched for sub structure in the Milky Ways stellar halo identifying at le ast largescale features tidal tails from the disruption of t he Bell et al. Sagittarius dwarf galaxy the LowLatitude stream and the Virgo overdensity Ibata Gilmore Irwin Yanny et al . Ivezi c et al. Newberg et al. Majewski et al. Yannyetal.Ibataetal.Juri cetal.Duf fauetal.Belokurovetal.aNewbergetal.a l thoughseeMomanyetal.foradiscussionofpossibledis rupteddiskoriginofmuchof theLowLatitudestream and a host of tidal tails from globular clusters e.g. Odenkirc hen et al. Grillmair Johnson dwarf galaxies e.g. Irwin Hatzidimitriou MartnezDelgado et al. and of unknownorigine.g.Belokurovet al. bGrillma ir aGrillmairDionatosBelokurovetal.. Fu r thermoresubstructurehasbeenobservedin thestellarhal osof othergalaxiese.g.Shanget al.Ibataet al. . T hus it isclearthataccretionofstarsfromsatellite galaxiesi sacon tributortothestellar halosofgalaxies. Yet it remains unclear whether accretion is the dominant mechanism for halo buildup. A key observable is the fractio n ofstars insubstructureoraquantitativemeasureof thede gree of substructure if much of the halo mass is held in substruc tures this argues for an accretion origin if instead a tiny frac tionofhalostarsisheldinsubstructuresthisplacesver ytight constraintsonanyrecent accretionscenario. Howeverit i s not clear howbest to addressthis question. One possible approa ch istodeneoverdenseareasofthehalobyhandoralgorithm ic meansandtottherestwithasmoothhalocomponentthere mainder would be in overdensities e.g. Newberg Yanny . Here we take a different approach. Since one does not know a prioriwhich stars should be smooth halo stars andwhichareinoverdensitieswetreat allhalostarsequ ally t a smooth model and examine the RMS of the data around thatsmoothmodelaccountingforthecontributiontotheRM S from counting statistics. In this way we obtain a quantita tive measureofthedegreeofhalostructureon greaterorsimilarpcscaleswith out having to make uncomfortabledecisions about which star s should be t with a smooth component and which should be includedinoverdensities. In this paper we apply this technique to explore the struc ture of the stellar halo of the Milky Way and place constrain ts on the fraction of stars in stellar halo under or overdensi ties using imaging data from the Fifth Data Release DR of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey SDSS York et al. Adelman McCarthy et al. . Under the assumption that the bulk of the stellar populationin thestellar haloisrelativelymet alpoor andoldwe isolate a sample dominatedbyhalo mainsequence turnoffstarsandexplorethedistributionofhalostarsas afunc tion of Galactic latitude longitude and distance from the S un . In we generatea grid of smooth halo modelsto com pare with the data and in we constrainthe besttsmoot h stellarhaloparametersandquantifythefractionofhalost arsin stellar halo under or overdensities. We compare the obser va tions with models of stellar halo formation in a cosmologica l contextin andpresenta summaryin. .DATA SDSSisanimagingandspectroscopicsurveythathasmapped ofthesky. Imagingdataareproducedsimultaneouslyin ve photometricbands namely ugri andzFukugitaet al. Gunn et al. Hogg et al. Gunn et al. . Thedataareprocessedthroughpipelinestomeasurephotome t ric and astrometric properties Lupton Gunn Szalay Stoughtonetal.Smithetal.Pieretal.Ive zic etal.Tuckeretal.andtoselecttargetsforspec troscopic followup. DR covers square degrees around the Galactic North Pole together with strips in the Galact ic southernhemisphere. Weusethecatalogueofobjectsclassi ed asstarswithartifactsremovedtogetherwithmagnitudelimits r.andg.. Photometricuncertaintiesas a function of magnitude are discussed in Sesar et al. . We choose to analyse only the largely contiguous square degree area around the Galactic North Pole in this work giving a to tal sample of stars of which .stars meet the selection criteria we apply later. In what follows we us e Galactic extinctioncorrectedmagnitudesandcolorsfoll owing Schlegel et al. such a correction is appropriate for the stars of interest in this paper owing to their large heliocen tric distances Dheliocentric greaterorsimilarkpc. ..Colormagnitudediagrams anintroduction To help get ones bearings it is instructive to examine some colormagnitudediagramsCMDderivedfromthesedataFi g. . The colormagnitude diagram of all stars with bis showninthetopleftpanelwherethegreylevelsshowthelog arithmofthenumberofstarsinthatbinpersquaredegreefro m starsdegto . starsdeg such a scaled CMD is fre quentlycalled a Hess diagram. To help interpret this Hess di a gram we show two additional Hess diagrams for two globular clusters covered by these data Pal and NGC in what followsdistancesandmetallicitiesfortheseandallothe rglob ular clusters are adopted from Harris . The top middle panel of Fig. shows a Hess diagram for stars in the globular clusterPalacircleofradius .aroundtheposition l. andb.. Thegreylevelsshow NonA onNoffA offNoffA off whereNdenotesthenumberofstarsintheeldofinterestde noted by the subscript on and a control eld off and Ais the area of that eld. In this case the control eld is nearby a circle of radius around the position l andb . Onecanclearlysee themainsequenceturnoffwith gr. andr with the lower main sequence extending redwards towards fainter magnitudes and the subgiant branch extendi ng redwards towards brighter magnitudes. In the top right pane l we show a similar Hess diagram for NGC because this clusterisratherbrighterthanPalomartheCMDisbetterpo p ulated and shows a more prominent red giant branch extend ingtowardsbrightermagnitudeswith gr.andhorizonal branchwith grlessorsimilar andr. There are a few points to note about Fig. . Firstly for old populations such as those in globular clusters it is clea r that the color of the main sequence turnoff MSTO is a metallicity indicator this point is discussed in more deta il for SDSS isochrones in Girardi et al. . Comparing Pal FeH.grMSTO.withNGCFe H. grMSTO.onecanseethatoldverymetalpoorpopu lationsFe Hlessorsimilarhavebluermainsequenceturnoffscom pared to less metalpoor populations Fe H.. Sec ond MSTO stars are a reasonably good distance indicator al beit with signicant scatter. In Fig. we show the absolute magnitude distribution of all stars with .gr. in Pal solid line distance .kpc NGC dashed line distance .kpcandathirdglobularclusterNGCdot tedline Fe H.distance .kpc. Themean rband absolute magnitudes of the distributions are ... re spectively and all distributions individually have RMS . Seehttpcas.sdss.orgastroenhelpdocsrealquery.as pflaThestellar halooftheMilkyWay FIG. .Hess diagrams in terms of grcolor and rband magnitude derived fromthe SDSSdata. In these Hessdia grams weshow for completeness the data to the very faintest limits rgreaterorsimilar where the SN is low and there is signicant contaminatio n by misclassied galaxies spurious detections etc. Thes e diagrams show in general two plumes in the stellar density distribution th at reect main sequence turnoff stars with gr. and intrinsically faint and lowmass disk dwarf stars with gr.. Welimit ouranalysis to .r. in this paper for themain sequence turnoff dominated colo r bin .gr. inthe areawhere the data quality is still excellent. Top left The density of stars per square degree per color interval per magnitude for b scaled logarithmically. This Hess diagram contains stars.Top middle The Hess diagram for the sparselypopulated globular clu ster Pal within a circle of radius ..Top right The Hess diagram for the globular cluster NGC . Bottom left A difference Hess diagram following Eqn. differencing t wo lines of sight lb and lb . The grey scales saturate at . In an axisymmetric halo this difference should equal zero within the shot noise it clearly does not. Bottom middleAdifference Hessdiagram differencing twolines ofsight lb and lb . Thegreyscales saturate at . ThisHessdiagram should be close tobutnot exactly equal to zero. Bottom right A difference Hessdiagram differencing two lines of sight lb and lb . Thegrey scales saturate at . Again in asymmetric halo this difference should equa l zero. mag. Thus modulo a metallicitydependent lessorsimilar. systematic uncertainty the MSTO is a good distance indicator with . magscatter. ExaminingthetopleftpanelofFig.inthelightoftheglob ular cluster CMDs it is possible to interpret some of the fea turesofthe bHessdiagram. At all distancesthe MSTO is visible as a clearlydenedas a sharp blue edge to the di s tribution indicating to rst order that the stars in the gal actic disk at largescale heightsand in the stellar haloare domina ted by a metalpoorold populationwith ages not that dissimilar to those of globular clusters this is the assumption that we wi ll adopt in the remainder of this paper. At gr. one sees the MSTO for stars in the stellar disk at greaterorsimilarkpcscale heightsat r often the disk at such scale heightsis referredto as the thick disk and in the stellar halo at r. One can see a kink in the MSTO at r as highlighted by the contours we interpret this as signifying a metallicity differencebe tween the disk at kpc scale heights and stellar halo this transition is also very prominent in Fig. of Lemon et al. and in Chen et al. who interpret this CMD feature in the sameway. The MSTO in the stellar halo has gr. similar to that of Pal Fe H. and .mag redder than those of NGC and NGC with Fe Hlessorsimilar. This suggests a halo metallicity Fe H. in excellent agree ment with measured halo metallicity distributions which p eak atFeH.e.g.Lairdetal. Vennet al.. ..Hessdiagramsofstructure inthestellarhalo One of the main goals of this paper is to explore the degree ofsubstructureinthestellarhalooftheMilkyWay. Onewayo f visualizingthisissueisthroughtheinspectionofHessdia grams where pairs of lines of sight are subtracted following Eqn. . We have done this exercise for three such lines of sight in Fig . where we have chosen three lineofsight pairs where the subtraction shouldhave been close to zero if the stellar halo oftheMilkyWay weresymmetricandsmooth. An extension of this methodology was used by Xu et al. who use the SDSSDR to study stellar halo structure using star count s and color distri butions of stars atGalactic latitudes b. Bell et al. FIG. .Ahistogram oftheabsolute magnitudes ofstarswith .gr . in three globular clusters Pal NGC and NGC . Th ese dis tributions give an impression of the actual convolution ker nel suffered by the .gr. MSTO stars in the halo of the Milky Way when going from distance to apparent magnitude. In this work we choose to ap proximate this distribution for modeling the stellar halo with a Gaussian d istribution with angbracketleftMrangbracketright.mag and Mr.magan appropriate choice for astellar popula tion with FeH .. The lower left panel of Fig. shows the difference of two differentlinesofsight lb alineofsighttowards the Virgo overdensity and a part of the Sagittarius stream and lb in a symmetric model such a subtraction should come out to zero. The grey levels saturate at deviatio ns of. It is clear that the lb lineof sight has strong orderofunity overdensities at MSTOs fainter t han r or distances of kpc assuming a MSTO absolute magnitudeof Mr.. Onecansee alsoa weaksubgiantand red giant branch feature at gr. and r again indicatingdistances kpc. The lower middle shows a line of sight towards lb minustheHessdiagramforstarstowards lb . This subtraction would be expected to come out close to but not exactly zero. It would be ideal to be able to subtract off the correct pairing of lb however SDSS has not mapped that area of sky owing to its southern declination . Thegreyscalesaturatesat . Thereareminorar tifacts in the subtractionhoweveronecan clearlysee an o ver density of main sequence stars with a MSTO with r. correspondingtoa distanceof kpc. The lowerright panel shows a line of sight towards lb a line of sight towards part of the LowLatitude overdensity minus that of lb . In a symmetric halo this subtractionshouldbe identicallyzero. The greys cale saturates at . There is a weak MSTO overdensityat r magsome kpcfromtheobserver. While these lines of sight have been selected to show varying degrees of halo inhomogeneity they sufce to illustrate two key points. First the halo is far from homogeneous with strong orderofunity overdensities as well as weaker features. Second owing to the partial sky coverage of the SDSS it is difcult to visualize and quantitatively e x plore the structure of the Milky Ways stellar halo using CMD subtractions. ..Mainsequenceturnoffstarmapsofthe stellarhalo One more intuitive approach to the distribution of stars in the stellar halo is to construct maps of the number of MSTO starsindifferentmagnitudethereforeroughlydistance slices. We select MSTO stars with foreground extinctioncorrected .gr. this color range was selected empirically to encompass the most denselypopulated bins of color space for the halo MSTO stars in Fig. . In . we showed that in such a color bin the average absolute magnitude of the MSTO stars in that bin were . and . respectively for Palomar FeH.andNGCFe H.accordingly we adopt an average MSTO Mr. in what follows for stars inthecolorbin .gr.. Suchanabsolutemagnitudeis in agreementwith modelCMDs whichsuggest Mr.. for stars with metallicities Fe H... We make the assumption that all stars in the stellar halo are old i.e. ap proximatelythesameageasthecalibratingglobularcluste rs. We show .mag wide bins of rband magnitude between .r. corresponding to heliocentric distances of lessorsimilardkpclessorsimilar. At such heliocentric distances the vertical distance above the Galactic plane is greaterorsimilarkpc along all lines of sight or at greaterorsimilar scale heightsfollowingthe pc thick disk scale height estimated by Larsen Humphreys . Thus thedominantcontributiontotheMSTOmapsisfromthestella r halo. TheresultingLambertazimuthalequalareapolarpro jec tionslogarithmicallyscaledareshowninFig.. While one loses the ability to probe for population differ encesin the stellar halobecauseofthebroadcolorbinadopt ed to derive these densities it is much more straightforward t o visualize the distribution of halo MSTO stars using this tec h nique. From Figs. and one can see that MSTO stars at a single distancewill showup in multipledistancebins the b ins are.magwideandtheRMS ofasingledistancestellarpop ulation is .mag. This can be seen easily from inspection of some of the hot pixels in Fig. corresponding to known globularclustersordwarfgalaxies. Thesefeaturespersis tfrom maptomapdespitetherebeingasinglepopulationat auniq ue distance giving a visual impression of the covariance betw een thedifferentmaps. Although in fact we found it impossible to avoid at least lo wlevel inho mogeneity along any pair of lines of sight. This presentation is similar to that of Fig. of Juri c et al. who present this kind of analysis for r and Newberg et al. who present asimilar diagram with slightly morerestrictive co lor cuts for g .Thestellar halooftheMilkyWay FIG. . The stellar halo of the Milky Way as seen by SDSS. The grey scale denotes the logarithm of the number density of .gr. stars per square degree ineightdifferent magnitude therefore meandistan ce slices aLambertazimuthal equalarea polar projectio n isused. Theblack areas arenotcovered bythe SDSSDRandreect thegreatcircle scanning adopted bythe SDSSwhencollecting itsimaging data. Apparent hotpixels arestellar overdensities fromglobular clusters and dwarf galaxies. Bell et al. Focusing on the brightest bins .r correspond ingtoheliocentricdistancesbetween kpcand kpcthe stellar distribution appears rather smooth with higher de nsity towardsthe Galactic centerandGalactic anticenter. Inthe case oftheGalacticcentertheinterpretationisstraightforw ard one is probing lines of sight which pass kpc from the Galactic centerandprobethedenserinnerpartsofthestellarhalo. Inthe case of the Galactic anticentersuch a structure is not expe cted in a oblatetriaxial halo model and recalling the lessorsimilarkpc scale height of the thick disk cannot be a thick disk this is the wel l knownLowLatitudestream e.g.Newberget al. Pear rubiaetal.Momanyetal.. Inthisvisualization the streamappearstobespreadoutbetweenafewdifferentmagni tude bins at bsome of that spread may be real but the welldened structure at lb has a relatively nar rowdistancespreadseetheHessdiagramresidualinthelow er righthand panel of Fig. showing a reasonably narrow main sequenceseealso thediscussioninGrillmairb. Focusing on the more distant bins r. corre sponding to heliocentric distances between kpc and kpc one nds little contribution from the LowLatitude stream. Instead superimposed on a reasonably smooth back ground is a prominent contribution from large tidal tails fr om the ongoing interaction of the Milky Way with the Sagittariu s dwarf galaxysee Belokurovet al. afora muchmorede tailed discussion. As quantied by Belokurov et al. a onecandiscernadistancegradientinthestreamfromthecl os estpopulationstowardstheGalacticanticenter lb to themostdistantpopulationstowards lb. While it is clear from these maps that the stellar halo of the Milky Way is not completely smooth there is a smooth i.e. not obviously structured component which dominates these maps if there are variations in this component these must b e onspatial scales greaterorsimilarontheskyorscales greaterorsimilarkpcat thedis tances of interest for this paper. A number of methods could be devised to probe halo structures on such scales. In this pa per we choose to construct models of a smooth stellar halo to represent the Milky Way and to ask about the fraction of star s deviating from this smooth global model as a measure of sub structureinthehalo. Thisexerciseisthetopicoftheremai nder ofthispaper. .MODELSOF ASMOOTHLYDISTRIBUTEDSTELLARHALO The stellar halo of the Milky Way is modeled using an tri axial broken powerlaw where we explore oblate and prolate distributions as special cases of triaxial. The minor axis o f the ellipsoid is constrained to be aligned with the normal to the Galactic disk this is is contrast with Newberg Yanny and Xu et al. who allow the minor axis to vary freely. There are free parameters the normalization Aconstrained directlythroughrequiringthatthemodelandobservations have thesamenumberofstarsinthemagnitudeandcolorrangecon sidered in this paper the two power laws inandout the break radius rbreakbaca and the Galactocentric longitude of the major axis Lmajor. We adopt a grid search with between and values in each parameter of interest yielding typi callyseveralhundredtoseveralthousandsmoothmodelstot est against the data. In what follows we assume a distance to the Galacticcenterofkpcanda Mr.fortheMSTOstarswith .gr.witha Mr.mag. We dene the best t to be the t for which the RMS de viation of the data around the model is minimised taking account of the expected Poisson counting uncertainty in themodelsummedoverallbinsin lbandmagnitude angbracketleftangbracketright nsummationdisplay iDiMi nsummationdisplay iM iMi totalradicalbig angbracketleftangbracketright nsummationtext iDi whereDiis the observed number of mainsequence turnoff stars in bin iMiis the exact model expectation of that bin M iisarealizationofthatmodeldrawnfromaPoissondistribu tion with mean Mi andnis the number of pixels. The metric totalhastwoconvenientproperties rstly totalisindepen dentofpixelscaleprovidedthatthesubstructureinthehalois wellsampledbythechosenbinningscale andsecondthat t he contribution of Poisson noise to has been removed leaving only the contribution of actual halo structure to the varian ce. Thus even though we have adopted a pixel size of .. in what follows corresponding to pc scales at the dis tances of interest our results are to rst order independe nt of binningscale becauseempiricallywe nd that the vast majo r ity of the variance is contained on kpc scales and greater. We defer to a future paper the exercise of understanding and interpreting the scale dependence of stellar halo substruc ture. The main uncertaintyin the estimated valuesof total is from the major contributions of a few large structures on the sky t o totalboththroughinuencingthebesttandthroughth eir direct contribution to the residuals. Later we attempt to q uan tifythisuncertaintythroughexclusionofthemostobvious sub structures from consideration before tting and estimatio n of total. The model parametersincludingthe normalizationgive an estimate of the total number of stars in the halo. We cal culate the total number of stars contained in the model with Galactocentric radius rGCkpc. In order to inter pret this value as a mass it is necessary to convert the numbe r of .gr. stars into a mass by calculating a mass tonumber ratio. We adopt an empirical approach following Newberg Yanny . Given that the Pal MSTO color seems to be a good match to the stellar halo MSTO color we use the mass of Pal M Odenkirchen et al. and the number of stars in Pal above background stars with .gr. to dene a masstonumber ra tio.MMSTO star. This ratio is in excellent agree ment with values derived using stellar population models fo r populations with Fe H. these models have values of MMSTOstar. As is clear from Figs. and a signicant part of the de viations from a smooth stellar halo is driven by the Sagittar ius and LowLatitude streams and by the Virgo overdensity. We therefore run the whole minimization twice once allow ing allbdata to dene the t and a second time mask ing out most of the Sagittarius and LowLatitude streams an d the Virgo overdensity by masking regions with band X where Xis the abscissa of the equalarea projec tionX.sinb. This masking is done to con The quantityp angbracketleftangbracketrightis inversely proportional to nin the presence of in trinsic structure in the dataset as is the quantity nP iDi thus making total pixel scale independent. We have conrmed by rebinning the data by factors of in area that total is indeed independent of pixel scale thus the domin ant contribution to the intrinsic structure of the stellar halo mustbe on linear scales greaterorsimilarpc. Kochetal. ndadecitoflowmassstarsinthecentra l parts ofPal suggesting that this ratio may bealower limit.Thestellar halooftheMilkyWay FIG. . The total of a large number of oblatehalo models. Each point represents the value of total for a different oblate halo model open dia monds show the residuals when no clipping is applied points show the result when areas with contributions SgrLowLatitude streamVi rgo are excised be fore carrying out the analysis. In each case we show the valu es oftotal as a function of inoutrbreakandca marginalized over all other model parameters. Recall that our denition of total subtracted off the Poisson un certainties already and is a measure of the degree of substr ucture on scales greaterorsimilarpc. It is clear that the oblateness caof the halo is the bestconstrained parameter combinations of all of the other parameters can p rovide equally good tsgiven anoblateness. Smallrandomoffsets areappl ied tothediscrete values of inoutrbreakandcato aid visibility. strain the importance of these larger structures in driving the modelparametersandresidualfraction. .RESULTS In this section we present the tting results for a large set of smooth symmetric stellar halos. In . we present the re sults from oblate stellar halos i.e. the two longest axes h ave equallengths. In.wediscussthettingresultsfortr iaxial stellar halos where all three axes can have different lengt hs comparingthisgeneralcase tothecase ofanoblatehalo. ..The besttsmoothoblatehalomodel In Fig. we show how the residual fraction dependson the halo parameters for a survey of parameter space for oblate ha los. It is immediately clear that these smooth models are a verypoor representationofthestructureofthestellarhalowith values of totalgreaterorsimilar. for the besttting models for the case where all bdata are t and totalgreaterorsimilar. for the case whereSagittariusVirgoandtheLowLatitudeoverdensiti esare clipped. Prolatemodelswereattemptedandwereall consid er ably poorer ts than the oblate case shown here i.e. the tre nd towards poorer ts in Fig. with increasing cacontinues for ca. InFig.weshowwiththeblacklinesthedistributionofthe differences between observed and smooth model distributio ns in ..bins for both the case where Sagittarius VirgoFIG. . The distribution of differences between the observed s tar counts per ..pixel and that predicted by the besttting smooth model di vided by the predicted by Poisson uncertainties black lines. The gray line shows the expected distribution from Poisson uctuations a round the smooth model. The left panel shows the distributions for the case in which sky areas of the Sagittarius Virgo and LowLatitude overdensities h ave been excised before this analysis the right panel shows the results for a llbdata. Note that of the excess variance is in the peak of the histogram wit h andtherestoftheexcessvariancereectsanumberofpixe lswith predominantly towards overdensities rather than toward s under densities. FIG. . Covariance between different model parameters for th e best oblatets total. for which all data with bwere t. Small random offsets are applied to thediscrete values of inoutrbreakandcato aid visibility. and LowLatitude structures were masked out left panel an d for allbdata right panel. In grey we show the dis tribution expected for Poisson noise around the smooth mode l alone. The difference between the observed histograms and Bell et al. FIG. . Data tting results for the triaxial model halos anala gous to Fig. . In this gure weshow only the behavior of the extra para meters required for a triaxial t as the behavior of inoutrbreakandcais similar to the oblate case shown in Fig. . Again diamonds show the results for all data withb and the points for the case where Sagittarius the LowLati tude stream and the Virgo Overdensity were masked out. The top two panels show howRMSdependson bawherebaistheoblate caseandisnotshown andLmajor the angle between the long axis of and the GCSun line. In the bottom two panels we show covariance between Lmajorandba andbaand caformodeltswith total.forwhichalldatawith bwerebeen t. Small random offsets are applied to the discrete values o fbaLmajorand bato aid visibility. Including triaxiality does not signica ntly improve the quality oftwhentriaxiality isincluded thenvaluesof Lmajorarefavored reecting an attempt by the triaxial smooth halo model to to ut contributions from the Sagittarius tidal stream. the Poissonexpectationisthesignal whichweobserve total .. for the clipped and unclipped datasets respec tively. From inspection of Fig. it is clear that a variety of dif ferent combinations of parameters are able to provide equal ly valid values of total. The oblateness of the halo is best constrained with values of ca. preferred. This deter mination of halo oblatenessis in excellentagreementwith t hat of previouswork e.g. Chiba Beers Chen et al. Larsen Humphreys Lemon et al. Newberg Yanny Juri c et al. Xu et al. . Other parame tersarelesswellconstrained variouscombinationsof inout andrbreakare capable of tting the halo equally well. Best t stellar halo masses overa radius range of kpc come out Notethattheappearance ofFig.dependsontheadoptedbinn ingthrough the contribition of Poisson uncertainties to the histogram of. The value oftotal is both in principle and in practice independent of bi nning scale. Largerangularbinsreducethecontribution ofPoissonnois esignicantly mak ing thedistribution of signicantly broader while thevalue of total is unchanged. The halo oblateness is affected by the assumed value of Mr. Variations of Mrof.magleadtochangesinoblateness of .. Furthermoreifthestel lar halo hasabinary fraction different fromthatof theglob ular clusters usedto calibrate the absolute magnitude and scatter of turnoff st ars thevalues for ab solute magnitude and scatter would be affected at the lessorsimilar.mag level leading to modestchanges in recovered oblateness Larsen Humphre ys .at.Mforthe modelswith total.with considerableuncertaintyfromthe masstonumberratio. The covariance of the different tting parameters of the oblate case is illustrated in Fig. . Models yielding total . are shown where all data with bare used. It is clear that the degeneracies in inoutandrbreakindicate that there are a number of different ways to construct reason able halo models with the general features of a power law out.in the outer parts and a similar or shallower power law in the very inner parts of the halo at Galactocentric radi i rGClessorsimilarkpc. It is important to note that the constraints on thebestthalomodelareveryweakowingtothesignican t degreeofhalosubstructure. ..Triaxialmodels The results for triaxial models are shown in Fig. . We do notshowtheresultsforthepowerlawparameters inoutand rbreak nor the run of total vs. ca as the results for these parametersis verysimilar tothe oblatehalocase. We focusi n steadontheresultsforthenewparameters baandLmajorthe angle between the long axis and the line between the Galactic CenterGCandSun. The best triaxial t is only very marginally better than the best oblate t with total . in particular the best tri axial t is still a very poor t to the stellar halo of the Milky Way. Inspection of Fig. shows that the best models are only mildly triaxial with bagreaterorsimilar. and with Lmajor roughly lining up with the Sagittarius stream. In the bottom panels we show the covariance of the parameters of all models with total.. There is little obvious covariance between the triaxiality parameters or between the power law paramet ers and the triaxiality parameters. This stresses the difcult y in tting a unique model to the halo owing to the signicant de greeofhalosubstructuretherearemanywaystotthehalob y balancing problems in one part of the halo against a better t elsewhere. ..A highlystructuredstellarhalo The key point of this paper is that a smooth and symmetric eitheroblateprolateortriaxialmodelisapoorreprese ntation ofthestructureofthestellarhaloofourMilkyWay. The total of thebdata around the model is even if the largest substructures are clipped the values of total are i.e. the largest substructures contain of the total variance. Onecanobtainavisualimpressionofhowpoorlytthestel larhaloisbyasmoothmodelbyexaminingFig.whichshows themeanstellardensityresidualsfromthe besttoblatemodel. The residuals are smoothed by a Gaussian kernel to sup press Poisson noise. One can see that the residuals are highl y structured on a variety of spatial scales. Particularly pro mi nent are contributions from the wellknown Sagittarius tid al streamdominatingallresidualsfor .r.theLow LatitudestreamGalacticanticenterdirectionand band theVirgooverdensityparticularlyprominentinthe .r sliceasthediffuseoverdensitycenteredat lb see Juricetal. andNewbergetal. . Itis interesting in this context that there have been claims of abreak in the powerlawofthestellarhaloat rGCkpcfromcountsofRRLyraestarssee Preston et al. although other analyses see no evidence for a break e.g. Chiba Beers and a claim that the stellar halo has a tra nsition from oblate with ca. to more nearly spherical at such radii Chiba Beers .Thestellar halooftheMilkyWay FIG. . Residuals of the mean stellar density data model from the best oblatemodel inoutrbreakca ..kpc .. The panels show different distance slices and have been smoothed using a Gaussian. The gray scale saturates at deviation from the model density and white represents an observed excess over thesmooth model predict ion. Bell et al. There are a number of other less obvious structures. In the last threemagnitudebinsonecandiscerntheOrphanStrea m Belokurov et al. b Grillmair a starting at lb and stretching to lb before disappear ingintothenoisethereisacleardistancegradientsucht hatas ldecreases the distance increases. Visible also is a recent ly identied structure of stars stretching from lb towards lb. This structure called the Hercules Aquila Overdensity by Belokurov et al. extends sout h of the Galactic plane as shown in that paper and is at a dis tance of kpc from the Sun. The HerculesAquila Over densityisreectedasadistinctoverdensityincolormagn itude space shown in the lower middle panel of Fig. . This CMD obtained by subtracting a background eld at lb fromanoverdensityeldat lbshowsasomewhat broadened MSTO with turnoff color gr. i.e. a simi lar color to the rest of the stellar halo. Fig. illustrates that this very diffuse overdensity lies in a busy area of the hal o making its extent difcult to reliably estimate. There are o ther potential structures visible in particular in the most dis tant r. bin. Some of the structure has lowlevel strip ing following the great circles along which the SDSS scans indicating that the structure is an artifact of uneven data q ual ity in different stripes. Other structures have geometry mo re suggestiveof genuinesubstructure we choose to not specul ate on the realityordistinctnessof these structuresat th isstage owingtothedecreasingdataqualityat thesefaint limits. ..Structureasafunctionofdistance ThevisualimpressiongivenbyFig.suggestsanincreasing amount of deviation from a smooth halo at larger heliocentri c distances. WequantifythisinFig.whereweshowthe total as a function of apparent magnitude for all stars with b diamonds. While it is clear that the exact values of total will depend somewhat on which smooth model happens to t best the value of total doubles from distances of kpc to kpc. FromcomparisonwiththecasewhenSagittariusthe LowLatitude stream and the Virgo overdensity are removed before calculation of the RMS one can see that much of this increaseinRMSisdrivenbythefewlargestructuresi.e.m uch of the RMS is contained in a few very welldened structures at largeradii. .COMPARISON WITHEXPECTATIONSFROM A CDM UNIVERSE In this paper we have attempted to t smooth models to the stellar halo of the Milky Way. Models containing . Min the radial range kpc with powerlaw density distributions rwere favored although all smooth mod els were a very poor t to the data . We have found that the stellar haloof the MilkyWay halo is richlysubstructuredw ith totalgreaterorsimilar.. Thefractionalamountofsubstructureappearsto increase with radius this increase is driven primarily by a few largestructures. To put our results into a cosmological context we compare the observations to predictions for stellar halo structure from appropriatemodels. Bullock Kratsov Weinbergan d This striping has a modest effect on our measurement of total as illus trated in Fig. . There are two main effects working in count eracting direc tions on one hand the striping will introduce a small amoun t of excess vari ance ontheother hand galaxies misclassied asstarsares moothly distributed across the sky reducing the variance. We chose to include th e r. bin in theanalysis noting thatits exclusion would notaffe ct our results orcon clusions.FIG. . The substructure in the Milky Way stellar halo compare d to predictions from cosmological models. The total as a function of apparent magnitude distance assuming Mr. for the best t oblate model. Dia mondsdenote theSDSSresults forall bdata crosses denote analagous results when the bulk of the Sagittarius and LowLatitude ti dal streams and the Virgo overdensity have been excised from consideratio n. The ensemble of solid gray lines show the predictions for total from models of stellar halogrowthinacosmologicalcontextfromBullockJohnsto ndotted lines are used at small radii where the simulations are likel y to be less robust. In these simulations the entire halo arises by model constr uction from the disruption of satellite galaxies. Bullock Johnston studied the structure of stellar h a los created exclusively through the merging and disruption of reasonably realistic satellite galaxies.These studies found that the debris from disrupted satellite galaxies produced stel lar halos with iroughlypowerlaw proles with over kpc from the galactic center e.g. Fig. of Bullock Johnston iitotalstellarhalomassesfrom Min tegrated over all radii and iiirichly substructured halos with increasinglyevidentsubstructureat largerdistancese. g.Figs. andofBullockJohnston. ..A quantitativecomparisonwith simulatedstellarhalos We quantify the last statement through comparison of the SDSS data for the stellar halo with simulated stellar halo s from Bullock Johnston . These simulated halos weregeneratedat randomusingsemianalyticmergertreesa p propriate for a CDM cosmology for a MilkyWay mass dark matterhalo. MapsofMSTOstarsanalagoustoourSDSSdata were constructed from the simulated Nbody stellar halos ac countingforallimportantobservationaleffectsasfollo ws. The numberof MSTOstars per particlewas estimated using a ratio Abadi Navarro Steinmetz analyzed the properties of the stellar haloofadiskgalaxyformedinaselfconsistent cosmologic al simulation. Such aselfconsistent simulation does notrequire that stellar halos bebuiltup solely through accretion yet the nal halos produced were very si milar to those of Bullock Kratsov Weinberg and Bullock Johnston . Thenumber of particles in the stellar halo of theAbadi Nava rro Stein metzmodelgalaxy was unfortunately too smallto perm itaproper com parison with theSDSS data.Thestellar haloofthe MilkyWay of main sequence turn off star for every L as calibrated empirically using Palomar . MSTO stars were distributed in space by smoothingoverthe nearest Nbodyparticle neigh bors using a Epanechnikov kernel of the form r. Each star was assigned a simulated Galactic latitude longitude and heliocentric distance assuming that the Sun is kpc from the Galactic center. The heliocentric distance is used to gener ate rband apparent magnitudes for the MSTO stars assuming an absolute magnitude Mr . and scatter Mr . following . ThemodelswerethenplacedinaLambertequalareapro jection and the survey limits of the SDSS DR data analyzed in this paper applied to the simulated maps. These simulatio ns were analysedin the sameway asthe SDSS databytting the same grid of oblate models. The results are shown in Fig. andFigs. and. Fig. shows the main result of this analysis all simulation s predict a great deal of halo substructure with values of total greaterorsimilar.. The typical smooth halo tting parameters where we quote the average and scatter derived from the ts to the simulated stellar halos are similar to that of the Milky Way s halowith out..Mrkpc..M andca..valuesof inwithinrbreakkpctend tobehigherthanthatobservedfortheMilkyWayat ... At small Galactocentric radii lessorsimilarkpc the simulationsare ex pected to be much too structured owing to the lack of a live Galactic potential see . of Bullock Johnston ac cordingly we show results for heliocentric distances lessorsimilarkpc asdottedlinesandplacelittleweightontherelativelyhi ghval ues of inrecoveredby the besttting models. At largerradii where the simulation results are expected to be more robust there are model halos with both less structure and more struc ture than the Milky Ways stellar halo. We illustrate this re sult inFigs.and. Fig.showstheresidualssimulation best t smooth halo for a model with very similar total to the MilkyWayonthesamegreyscaleusedforFig.ineightdiffer ent apparent magnitude slices. Fig. illustrates the dive rsity of simulated halos showing the r. apparent mag nitude slice correspondingto heliocentric distances kpc fortheSDSSandthe CDMrealisationsofMilkyWaymass stellar halos. A number of the general characteristics of th e simulationsmatchthecharacteristicsoftheSDSS data the an gular extent of features in the nearest bins is typically v ery large whereas the angular width of streams in the distant bi ns tendstobesmaller. Inthedistantbinsthehalosubstructu reisa combinationofwellconnedrelativelyyoungstreamsand dif fusesheetsofstarsfrombotholderdisruptioneventsandyo ung events on almost radial orbits K. Johnston et al. in prepar a tion with largescale overdensities and underdensities being seen. This comparison shows that the the overall level of the sub structureseenintheMilkyWaysstellarhalofallsintothe mid dleoftherangeofpredictionsfromsimulations simulatio ns in which the stellar halo arises exclusively from the mergin g and disruption of satellite galaxies. Furthermore the cha rac ter of the structures in the simulated stellar halos is very s im ilar to those observed in the Milky Way. The models clearly have some shortcomings in particular the use of a slowly growing rigid potential for the central disk galaxy in the Bu l lockJohnstonsimulationsleadstoexcessstructur ein the central parts. Furthermore it is possible that the real stel lar halo has a smooth component formed either in situin the potential well of the galaxy or accreted so early that no spatial structure remains. Our analysisshowsthat there is no n eed for such a smooth componentto explain the data and suggests that a smooth component does not dominate the halo at radii rGCkpc. Yet we have not tested quantitatively how largeasmoothcomponentcouldlieinthisradialrangeandst ill lead to the observed RMS such an exercise will be the object ofafuturework. ..Limitationsofthiscomparison While there are steps which can and will be taken with this dataset to sharpen the comparison with the simulations e.g . a quantitative comparison of the morphology and spatial sca le of substructure and the investigation of substructure met allic ities it is nonetheless clear that small number statisti cs is a key limitation of this work. The SDSS DR contiguouslycov ers only of the sky encompassing some of all halo stars with Galactocentric radii between and kpc as est i matedbycomparisonofthesmoothhalostellarmasseswithth e actual mass contained in the maps. Larger and deeper multi color imaging surveys will be required to expand the coverag e of the Milky Ways stellar halo probing to larger halo radii where models predict that halo substructure should be easie r to discernseee.g.the prominentsubstructuresdiscove redby Sesar et al. using RR Lyrae stars in the multiplyimaged Stripe of the SDSS. Yet there is signicant halotoh alo scatterinthesimulatedstellarhalosthusmatchingthep roper tiesofasinglestellarhalowillalwaysbearelativelyeasytask. More powerful constraints will come from studies of the stel larhalosofstatisticalsamplesofgalaxiesusinghighres olution groundbasedorHSTdataseeencouragingprogressfrome.g . Fergusonet al.anddeJonget al.. .CONCLUSIONS Inthispaperwehavequantiedthedegreeofsubstructu re in the Milky Ways stellar halo. We have used a sample of stellar halo main sequence turnoffstars isolated using a color cutof .gr.andtoblateandtriaxialbrokenpower lawmodelsofthedensitydistributionto thedata. We nd that the best t oblateness of the stellar halo is ca..overtheGalactocentricradialrangetokpc. Other halo parameters are signicantly less wellconstrai ned manydifferentcombinationsof parametersincludingmild tri axialitycanprovidecomparablygoodts. Asinglepowerla w rwithprovidesanacceptablethaloproleswith somewhat shallower slopes at rlessorsimilarkpc and steeper slopes outside that range are also acceptable. The halo stellar mas s ofsuch modelsbetweenGalactocentricradiiof andkpcis M with considerable uncertainty from the conver sionofthenumberof .gr.turnoffstarstomass. Importantlywendthat allsmoothmodelsareverypoorts to the spatial distribution of stellar halo stars. Deviatio ns from smooth parameterized distributions quantied using the R MS of the data around the model t in ..bins pc scales at the distancesof interest give totalgreaterorsimilar. after sub tracting the known contribution of Poisson counting unce r tainties. Furthermore the halo seems signicantly more st ruc turedatlargerradiithanintheinner kpcafewindividual structuresdominatethisincreasein total atlargerradii. Bell et al. FIG. .Residuals simulation smooth model smoothed using a Gaussian from thebest oblatemodelfor Model fromBullock Johnston in different distance slices. Thegray scale saturates at fromthe smooth model density.Thestellar haloofthe MilkyWay FIG. . Residuals SDSS or simulations minus the smooth model smoothed using a Gaussian from the best oblatemodel ts for the SDSS data top left panel and for the simulations from Bullock Johnsto n . We show only the r. slice corresponding to heliocentric distances kpc. Thegray scale saturates at from the smooth modeldensity. Bell et al. Qualitativelytheseresultsshowthatthestellarsubstr ucture foundin the Milky Ways halo is not at all a small perturturba tionontopofasmoothhalo. Remarkablythissameconclusio n holds when excising the most prominent known substructures fromtheanalysissuchasthe Sagittariusstreamandthenc on sideringtheremainingareaofthesky. Wecomparedtheseobservationalresultswithmodelsofstel lar halo growth in a cosmological context taken from Bullock Johnston . In these models the stellar halo arises exclusively from the disruption of and mergers with satelli te galaxies. The models were analysed in the same way as the SDSS data. Their models predict in the radial range kpc halo masses Mintegrated over all radii or masses Min theradialrangekpcandrichly structured stellar halos with totalgreaterorsimilar.. At radii where the model predictions are most robust the models show a range of degreesofsubstructurefromsubstantiallyless thanth atob served for the Milky Way to substantially more. Furthermore the character of the substructure appears very similar to th at showed by the Milky Ways stellar halo. While it is clear that the models are not perfect this comparison lends considera ble quantitative weight to the idea that a dominant fraction of t he stellar halo of the Milky Way is composed of the accumulated debrisfromthedisruptionofdwarfgalaxies. We thank JunHwan Choi and Martin Weinberg for useful discussions. E. F. B. thanks the Deutsche Forschungsgemein schaftfortheirsupportthroughtheEmmyNoetherProgram. D . B.Z.wassupportedbyaPPARCfundedrollinggrantposition . V.B.wassupportedbyaPPARCFellowship. T.C.B.acknowl edges partial support for this work from grant PHY PhysicsFrontierCenterJointInstituteforNuclearAstro physics JINAawardedbytheUS NationalScienceFoundation. Funding for the SDSS and SDSSII has been provided by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation the Participating Institut ions the National Science Foundation the U.S. Department of En ergy the National Aeronautics and Space Administration t he Japanese Monbukagakusho the Max Planck Society and the Higher Education Funding Council for England. The SDSS Web Site ishttpwww.sdss.org. The SDSS is managed by the Astrophysical Research Con sortium for the Participating Institutions. The Participa ting In stitutions are the American Museum of Natural History As trophysical Institute Potsdam University of Basel Cambr idge University Case Western Reserve University University o f Chicago Drexel University Fermilab the Institute for Ad vanced Study the Japan Participation Group Johns Hopkins University the Joint Institute for Nuclear Astrophysics the Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology t he Korean Scientist Group the Chinese Academy of Sciences LAMOSTLosAlamosNationalLaboratorytheMaxPlanck Institute for Astronomy MPIA the MaxPlanckInstitute for AstrophysicsMPANewMexicoStateUniversityOhioStat e UniversityUniversityof PittsburghUniversityof Ports mouth PrincetonUniversitytheUnitedStatesNaval Observatory and the UniversityofWashington. 