 Very high energy emission provides us with another window on the con dition within the emitting region in Gammaray Bursts GRBs. Such a window is very important in view of the present confusion between dif ferent modications to the standard afterglow model proposed to explain the recent observation of Swift. The upcoming high energy observatory Supported by the USIsrael BSF.GLAST is an ideal tool to detect such emission. Together with the SwiftX ray Telescope XRT it would pro vide a very wide band monitoring of the afterglow that might enable us to distinguish between the dierent models. We discuss here several pre dictions of current models for the ex pected high energy light curves and their relation to the Xray afterglow. Preprint submitted to Elsevier February sss sss sss ssssssssssssssssssssssssss ss ssssssssssss ssssssssssssssssssssssssssss ssssssssssssss ssssssssssssssssssssssssssss sssss s sssssssss ssssssssss sssssssssss sss ssssssssss sssssssssss sssssssssssssssss Fig. . The SSC radiation of the forward shock the energy injection case and the time increasing eFan et al. . SSC emission of the forward shock The dominant source of long lasting high energy GRB afterglow emis sion is SSC of the hot electrons in the forward external shock. At early stages of the afterglow when the cool ing of most electrons is important the luminosity of the SSC emission LSSC is related to the luminosity of the synchrotron radiation Lsyn as LSSCY Lsyn where Yis the Comp ton parameter. The Xray luminos ityLX is a small fraction of Lsyn. We would like to use it as a proxy for the total luminosity and we de ne a factor XLXLsynso that LSSCY LXX. A wide band SSC afterglow data and the Xray data will have quite similar temporal be haviors as long as Xdoes not vary signicantly with time. Overall we expect therefore that LXandLSSC should be highly correlated. In other words the GRBs with slowly decay ing Xray light curve should show similar high energy feature. This is conrmed by the more detailed analysis Fan et al. Wei Fan and by the numerical results as shown in Fig.. Energy injection and time increasing e have been proposed to explain the slowly declining Xray phase seen in many GRB afterglows. The result ing SSC light curves in both cases follow the Xray. Although the SSC light curves are somewhat dierent the dierence is probably too small to distinguish between the two mod ications Fan et al. . However the typical SSC frequency SSC m eEk where Ekis the total energy of the outow. The strong edepen dence suggests a signicant dierence in the time evolution of the high en ergy spectrum between the two mod els. Possible high energy emis sion associated with ares Xray ares during the afterglow have been detected by BeppoSAX Piro et al. and conrmed by Swift to exist in a large fraction of the afterglows Nousek et al. Zhang et al. . Such ares should be accompanied by a high energy emission either because of SSC emis sion of the electrons powering the ares or because EIC upscattering that takes place when are photons pass through a hot blast wave. GeV ash. We consider rst the direct SSC emission associated with Xray ares. The typical frequency of the upscattered Xray photons depends on the Lorentz factor of the scattering electrons. The mag netic energy density B at a ra dius Rarecan be estimated as B Gauss L xR are where Be. For this value of the magnetic eld the peak energy of the are photons Ep. keV re quires a typical random Lorentz fac tor of the emitting electrons em L XR areEp. keV. With this Lorentz factor the ex pected SSC emission peaks at ssc p.GeV L XRare Ep. keV. The total uence of the SSC emission of the are shock is comparable to that of the Xray emission typically erg cm. In a late inter nal shock with Rarecm Fan Wei a GeV ash accompa nying the Xray are is possible Wei et al. however see Wang et al. . In an external shock a GeV TeV ash is predicted see also Galli Piro . Extended EIC emission. A sec ond source of high energy emission arises when Xray are photons that are produced by internal energy dis sipation are be inverse Compton upscattered by the external shocks hot electrons. A central ingredient of this scenario is that in the rest frame of the blast wave the seed photons are highly beamed. We take care of this eect following the analysis of Aharonian Atoyan . If the EIC emission duration is com parable to that of the Xray are theEIC luminosity can be estimated by Lelnerg seEkt . In the rest frame of the shocked mate rial the EIC emission peaks at sc and it vanishes for small scatter ing angles. This eect lowers the high energy ux signicantly in two ways. First a fraction of the total energy is emitted out of our line of sight and thus the received power is depressed relative to the isotropic seed photon case. Second the strongest emission is from Fan Piran . Thus the high energy EIC emission will be delayed by Tpktf after the are emitted at tf. AsTp is much longer than T the duration of the soft Xray are the EIC high energy ux would be low LEICLeln TpT. A comparison of the EIC high en ergy component with the SSC emis sion from the forward shock my ren der the EIC high energy component undetectable. At the time of the are sec after the burst the for ward shock emission peaks in farUV to soft Xray band. The correspond ing SSC a luminosity of the forward shock around tfisLSSCLelnY Y. This is signicantly larger than LEICand the wide EIC are would be undetectable cf. Wang et al. . In special cases the EIC component might still be detectable. This hap sss sss sss sss sssssssssssssssssssssssssssssss ssssssssssssssss ssss sssssssss sssssssssssssss sssss sssssssssssssssss ssssssssssss ssssssssssssssss ssssss sssssssss ssssssss s sssssssss sssssss Fig. . The MeV GeV emis sion arising from are photon and a for ward shock interaction for ISMwind case Fan et al. . pens for bursts having a weak SSC emission and in which the forward shock electrons are in slow cooling before the Xray are phase. The energy of these electrons will be lost mainly in the EIC process and in this case the EIC luminosity will be enhanced. If the EIC emission dom inates over the SSC emission the high energy light curve will atten as shown in Fig.. Such a attening could also arise by energy injection or due to an increasing e. However as shown in last section in these two scenarios the Xray and the high energy emission behaviors are quite similar and attening should be ap parent also in the Xray signal. The EIC emission should on the other hand show an Xray are preceding high energy emission and not accom panying at Xray light curve. A numerical example illustrating the possible EIC emission following the Xray are in GRB B is shown in Fig.. sssssssssssssssssssssssssssssss ssssssssss sssssssss sssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssss sssssssssssss sssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssss sssssssssssssss sssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssss sssss ssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssss ssssss Fig. . The expected high energy after glow signatures the lower panel cor responding to the schematic Xray af terglow light curve based on SwiftXRT data Fan et al. . Summary and Discussion We have shown that if the current interpretation of the SwiftXRT data the upper panel of Fig. is correct there should be a canonical high en ergy afterglow light curve see the lower panel of Fig. for illustration. A detection of such a high energy component will enable us to test current models of GRBs and their afterglow. A high energy component that follows the lower energy light curve will conrm that the low en ergy component is Synchrotron. If the lower component is produced via Inverse Compton the KleinNishina suppression will prevent a second upscattering. A detailed compari son of the high energy and the low energy light curves in particular during the shallow decline phase might even enable us to distinguish between dierent modications of the standard afterglow model. This is because for the two most widely considered models the energy injec tion and time increasing e the time evolution of the high energy spec tra are very dierent. A long lasting high energy component that follows a low energy are would prove the internal origin of this are and the EIC model for the origin of the high energy emission. The upcoming high energy observatory GLAST can thus play a key role in exploring the GRB afterglow physics. 