 Elliptical galaxies were believed to be completely dor mant and therefore to consist of old stellar populations due to the galactic wind which had blown the gas out and stopped star formation Johnson Axford Mathews Baker Faber Gallagher . The discovery of an Xrayemitting hot interstellar medium ISM in these objects has dramatically renewed our view of their physical properties and formation history e.g. Forman et al. . Warm gas is also detected in a signicant fraction of ellipticals although the estimated mass is small M Phillips et al. Ho et al. a. In addition multiwavelength ob servations from optical to radio reveal the existence of the fair amount of H Igas e.g. Knapp et al. Breg man et al. Huchtmeier Knapp Morganti et al. dust e.g. Knapp et al. van Dokkum Franx Wiklind Henkel Tomita et al. Colbert et al. Tran et al. Martel et al. and molecular gas e.g. Wiklind et al. Knapp Rupen VilaVilar o et al. Young Nakan ishi et al. in a signicant fraction of ellipticals. Pa r ticularly some of the cold gas appears as a disk at the center of the galaxies. Highresolution images with Hub ble Space Telescope HST uncovered that the majority of elliptical galaxies possess such dusty cold disks with a typical mass of Mand sizes of pc e.g. Tomita et al. . Molecular gas disks are also observed in the central region with estimated masses of Mand extents up to a few kpc Knapp The Observatories of the Carnegie Institution of Washingto n Santa Barbara Street Pasadena CA Swinburne University of Technology Hawthorn VIC Aus tralia Department of Astrophysical Sciences Princeton Universi ty Peyton Hall Ivy Lane Princeton NJ Okuda et al. Young Nakanishi et al. . In this paper we call such observed central cold structures circumnuclear CN disks. So far there is no evidence of a correlation between the mass of the CN disk and the total stellar mass of ellipticals e.g. van Dokkum Franx . The estimated densities of the CN disks are relatively high. CN disks in gasrich disk galaxies obviously har bor star formation e.g. Phillips et al. Ho et al. b Koda et al. . However it is still a matter of debate whether or not the CN disks in ellipticals have star formation. Ho et al. a and Ho suggest that there is no clear evidence of star formation in the central region of bright elliptical galaxies. On the other hand Phillips et al. show that less luminous ellipticals tend to have star formation. It also seems that the properties of the ISM of ellipticals depend on galaxy mass the detection rates of H Iand molecular gas are higher in less luminous galaxies Lake Schommer Lees et al. Sadler et al. Sage et al. . Okuda et al. measured the density and rotation of the CN disk in the radio galaxy C and suggest that its disk is stable against local gravitational instability consistent with the lack of evidence for star formation in this system Owen et al. . Young also performed a similar analysis for NGC and NGC . Therefore the gravitational stability of the disk may be a key factor for the star formation condition in the CN disk Kennicutt but see also Koda et al. . In the central region of elliptical galaxies there are two empirical trends as a function of their mass. One is a wellestablished correlation between the black hole BH mass and the stellar mass of bulge Magorrian et al. Marconi Hunt H aring Rix . The other one is the fact that the central stellar density pro le loosely depends on the mass of galaxies Faber et al. Kawata Cen and Ho Ravindranath et al. Stiavelli et al. Fer rarese et al. Lauer et al. . The highresolution images from the HSTenable the measurement of the stel lar density prole in the central region of galaxies Crane et al. Grillmair et al. Jae et al. Lauer et al. . Faber et al. suggest two dierent categories for the inner prole of elliptical galaxies lu minous galaxies have a core and less luminous galaxies have a powerlaw prole without any evidence of a core. On the other hand Ravindranath et al. and Rest et al. found galaxies with intermediate in ner proles that cannot be categorized as either cores or power laws. Trujillo et al. b attempt to link the central and global proles of earlytype galaxies by not ing that the outer proles of ellipticals are well known to be tted by the S ersic law rnlaw S ersic and whose index nis wellcorrelated with the global proper ties of galaxies such as the eective radius and the total luminosity e.g. Caon et al. Graham Guzm an . They suggest that the inner powerlaw prole can be explained as the extension of the outer S ersic pro le except for galaxies with central cores. Therefore among powerlaw galaxies the brighter members have proles with larger n and hence steeper powerlaw slope for the inner prole. On the other hand Trujillo et al. b propose that luminous galaxies with cores can be described with a coreS ersic prole which is a com bination of a core approximated as an inner powerlaw prole with a shallow slope and an outer S ersic prole. Motivated by these facts we study the gravitational stability of the CN disk for elliptical galaxies with dier ent masses. The stability of a rotating disk can be de scribed by the socalled Toomres Qparameter Toomre Goldreich LyndenBell . This parameter also provides a criterion for star formation in rotating disks e.g. Kennicutt . Tan Blackman study the stability of the CN disk analytically. They con clude that CN disks are inevitably unstable and should have star formation activity even in giant ellipticals suc h as M. However so far no indication of star formation has been observed in M. Although Tan et al. report the detection of the molecular gas in the central region of M the optical spectral features of Ms CN disk are not consistent with star formation. The nu clear spectrum of M shows classical signatures of low ionization nuclear emissionline regions Ho et al. c which as a group are consistent with being active galac tic nuclei AGNs accreting at a low rate Ho et al. Ho . The gravitational potential in the CN region is gov erned by the central BH as well as the stars in the inner bulge. The study of Tan Blackman however ignores the potential of the stellar bulge component. Our analysis of the stability of the CN disk in ellipticals takes into account both contributions to the potential and their dependence on the global mass of the system. Section summarizes our method to analyze the stability and de scribes models of the CN disk and the stellar potential in the CN region. Section shows the results and in Section we discuss how our results t with the recent observed properties of the central region of ellipticals. .METHODThe stability of a selfgravitating disk can be analyzed by Toomres Qparameter Toomre Goldreich LyndenBell . The denition of Toomres Qpa rameter is Qcs Gd where cs and dare the sound velocity epicycle fre quency and surface density of the gas disk. If Q the disk is unstable. The specic frequency for a disk is described as Rd dR where is the circular frequency. We assume that the disk is steady i.e. the accretion rate is the same at dierent radii. The accretion rate can be written as MR RacccsRRdR const . where accis the dimensionless viscosity parameter Shakura Sunyaev Pringle Frank et al. . This allows us to derive the density prole of the CN disk dR once the total mass Md and the radius Rd of the disk are xed. The circular density prole R is determined by the gravitational poten tial. For simplicity we assume that the gravitational potential is dominated by the central BH and the stellar component and that the contribution from the CN disk is negligible. We also assume that the stellar density is much higher than the dark matter density in the central region. We examine the stability of the CN disk within the potential of the central region of spherical galaxies with dierent total masses of the stellar bulge Ms. We adopt the relation between the BH mass and the stellar mass from H aring Rix logMBHM . .log MsM. Hence once Msis xed we can calculate the potential from the BH with the mass of MBH. As mentioned in Section the mass dependence of the inner stellar density prole is discussed by a number of authors. The rst thorough study was carried out by the Nuker team who introduced the Nuker law to describe the observed surface brightness prole of the central regions of galaxies. The Nuker law Lauer et al. Faber et al. is given by IR IbRR b RR b. The asymptotic logarithmic slope inside Rbis the asymptotic logarithmic outer slope is and parametrizes the sharpness of the break. The break ra diusRb is the point of maximum curvature in loglog coordinates. The break surface brightness Ib is the sur face brightness at Rb. This function is designed to t the surface brightness prole in the inner region and not to describe the entire prole. Graham et al. pro posed a new formula that is a combination of an inner powerlaw prole and an outer S ersic law. They call it the coreS ersic law which is described as IRI RbR expbraceleftBig bRR bR ensbracerightBig Stability of Circumnuclear Disk in Ellipticals with IIbexpbracketleftBig bnsRbRensbracketrightBig . The parameter Rbis the break radius to separate the inner power law with a slope of from the outer S ersic law with eective radius Reand index ns and Ibis the surface brightness at Rb. The parameter controls the sharpness of the transition between the inner and outer proles where a higher value leads to sharper transitions. Trujillo et al. b suggest that the coreS ersic law can be simplied with and still provide a good description to the observed proles see also Ferrarese et al. . In this limit IRIbRbRuRbR ebRbRensebRRensuRRbbracketrightBig where uxa is the Heaviside step function. It is still controversial which of the two formalisms bet ter describes the surface brightness prole in the cen tral region of galaxies Ferrarese et al. Lauer et al. . In this paper we adopt the coreS ersic law simply for computational convenience to link the density proles in the inner region to the total mass of the stellar bulge. Although the simplied version of the coreS ersic law as given in equation has been adopted to t recent ob servations Trujillo et al. b Ferrarese et al. we use equation by setting to . for computa tional convenience. Lauer et al. demonstrate how the sharp transition generated from equation leads to poor ts to the observed surface brightness proles. The adopted provides a less sharp transition. This assumption also guarantees that the deprojected density prole does not increase with radius with our adopted parameters see below but the proles is still close to the simplied formula of equation used in the obser vations. As a comparison between the Nuker law eq. and the coreS ersic law eq. we briey mention how the logarithmic gradient R at radius of Rcan be de scribed for each tting function see also Trujillo et al. b. Rest et al. show that for the Nuker law R bracketleftbiggdlogIR dlogRbracketrightbigg RRRb RRb. For the coreS ersic law eq. Trujillo et al. b show that the slope can be written as R b nsRensRRR bnsRbR RbR. The coreS ersic law eq. is equivalent to the S ersic law when Rb and . Then the S ersic law is described as IxAsexpbsxns withxRR e. Prugniel Simien derive the numerical solutions AsItotbnss nsns bsns . ns where Itotis the total bulge luminosity of the integration for x see also Graham Driver and references therein. For simplicity we dene the total bulge mass Ms as the total mass of the integration of the S ersic law of equation regardless of the existence of the core. Then assuming a constant masstoluminosity ratio at the dierent radii we can describe the surface brightness at the break radius Ib for the coreS ersic law eq. as IbMs bnss nsnsebsRbRens. It is well known that Reandnscorrelate with the to tal luminosity of galaxies e.g. Kormendy Caon et al. Graham . From their ts of HSTim ages of Virgo earlytype galaxies using equation Fer rarese et al. nd that the proles of bright galax ies MB . mag require a core while those of less luminous galaxies can be described with the S ersic law. They also derive the following relations between the gband eective radius and Bband absolute magnitude logRe.MB . for the S ersic galaxies and logRe.MB . for the coreS ersic galaxies Ferrarese et al. for er ror estimates see. The units of Reis arcseconds which for Virgo corresponds to . pc. In addition they suggest that the S ersic index nsand the Bband absolute magnitude are related by logns.MB . valid for galaxies of both classes. In this paper we adopt these relations for computational convenience. We further assume that the stellar masstolight ra tio for earlytype galaxies in the Bband is B MsLBLB with MB . mag and that Bis independent of mass these assumptions are suf ciently accurate for earlytype galaxies Trujillo et al. a. With some exceptions Ferrarese et al. nd that there is a critical luminosity that separates the S ersic galaxies from the coreS ersic galaxies. With the assumptions made above their critical luminosity of MBc. mag corresponds to Msc . M systems with masses lower than Mscare assumed to follow the S ersic law. Then we derive the halfmass ra dius using equations and with the assumption that the gband halflight radius is similar to the half mass radius. Once we x Ms all the parameters of equa tion can be determined and equation provides the projected mass density prole of sR IBRB. Assuming spherical symmetry we can derive the three dimensional stellar mass density sr through e.g. Bin ney Tremaine sr integraldisplay rdsR dRdR Rr. .RESULTS ..Stability of CN Disks with Fixed Mass and Radius As mentioned in Section so far no correlation has been found between the mass or size of CN disks and Kawata Cen and Ho TABLE Stellar Bulge Density Profiles for the Host Galaxies Model Ms Prole Re nsRb M Ba M kpc pc mag S S ersic . . . S S ersic . . . cS coreS ersic . . . . . cS coreS ersic . . . . aBband luminosity estimated with a stellar masstolight ra tio of BMsLBLB . Fig. . Stellar density prole as a function of threedimensional radius top and the total mass of stars and BH within the radius bottom for four dierent models indicated in the upper panel. the host galaxy mass. In this section we study how the stability of CN disks with xed mass and radius depends on the total mass of the host galaxies. Here we focus on a disk with mass log MdM and radius Rd . kpc which is roughly the same as the CN disk observed in NGC by Young . Disks with a range of dierent masses and radii will be discussed in the next section. Note that once MdandRdare xed dR does not depend on accorcs. Hence QR described by equation is independent of accand is simply pro portional to csradicalbig dkBTdmp where dkBTd and mpare the specic heat Boltzmanns constant the gas disk temperature the mean molecular mass and the proton mass respectively. Throughout the paper we xedcsto a value corresponding to .d and Td K which is a typical temperature of observed CN disks e.g. Wiklind et al. Tran et al. . Stability of the CN disk is examined for host galaxy models with stellar bulge masses of log MsM and . We apply the S ersic law to the model with logMsM model S and the coreS ersic law to the model with log MsM model cS. Since the adopted scaling relation used in Section is known to have signicant scatter and the model of log MsM is close to the critical mass of Msc .M for the two stellar density proles we consider two cases of the S ersic model S law and the coreS ersic model cS laws for host galaxies with log MsM . All the parameter values for the stellar density proles and the estimated Bband absolute magnitude are summa rized in Table . We choose . for the coreS ersic law of equation which is a relatively low value among observed cores e.g. Ferrarese et al. this is a con servative choice because it leads to a maximally unstable CN disk. Figure shows that the stellar density prole and the total mass of stars and BH as a function of radius for the four models. Comparison between models S and S shows that the density prole is steeper for higher mass galaxies which have a larger ns. The coreS ersic models lead to a lower density in the inner region. Consequently model cS has even lower density than model S and a similar density to model S within the break radius of cS. However higher mass galaxies have a more massive BH. As a result the total mass within a given radius is generally higher for the higher mass galaxies except around the break radius for the coreS ersic models. Figure presents the values of Toomres Qparameter at dierent radii of the CN disk for the four models. We also examine two additional cases for each model one is the case assuming no BH dotted line and the other one dashed line ignores the stellar potential i.e. only the Keplerian potential of the BH is considered. As described in Section the circular velocity Fig. is calculated purely by the BH andor stellar potential and the gas disk density prole Fig. is derived from the condition of MR constant in equation . The BHonly potential results dashed lines demon strate that since higher mass galaxies have a more mas sive BH CN disks are more stable in higher mass galax ies. However for the assumed CN disk even model cS still has Q i.e. the CN disk is unstable. The stellarBH potential results clearly demonstrate that the stellar potential greatly helps to stabilize the CN disk. Moreover comparison between the results for the stellarBH potential and the results of the case of stellar only potential indicates that the BH helps to stabilize the CN disk only in the inner region a few pc depending on the BH mass and the stellar density proles. There fore the stellar potential cannot be ignored in studying the dynamics of the CN disk. For the S ersic models the stellar potential stabilizes the CN disk more in the higher mass galaxies because higher mass galaxies have larger ns i.e. higher central concentration of the stellar potential see also Fig. . AtStability of Circumnuclear Disk in Ellipticals Fig. . Toomres Qvalue as a function of radius for the CN disk withMd MandRd . kpc in galaxy models indicated in the panels. The black solid line presents the Qvalue calculated by taking into account both the BH and the stellar potential. The dotted line only includes the stellar potential while the d ashed line takes into account only the potential of the central BH whic h is correlated with the mass of the stellar component as assumed in equation . The gray solid line marks Q . Fig. . The circular velocity vc as a function of the radius of the CN disk with Md MandRd . kpc in galaxy models indicated in the panels. The solid line takes into account bo th the BH and the stellar potential. The dotted line only includes t he stellar potential while the dashed line takes into account only the potential of the central BH. a xed stellar mass of log MsM the coreS ersic model leads to a lower Qvalue and a more unstable disk. The surface density prole of the CN disk is sensitive to this change of the stellar potential prole Fig. . The stellaronly potential results clearly demonstrate that t he disk gas density has a peak around the break radius. Due to this peak density the Qvalue becomes as low as the case of the BHonly potential. However the BH can stabilize the disk in the inner region and the stellarBH potential case is much more stable. As a result model cS is more stable than model S. In general CN disks in higher mass galaxies are more stabilized due to higher mass BH and more centrally concentrated prole of the stellar component. However if the host galaxy has the coreS ersic law prole the CN disk is more unstable compared with the CN disk in a galaxy with the same stellar mass and BH mass but having S ersic prole.Fig. . The surface density prole dR of the CN disk with Md MandRd . kpc in galaxy models indicated in the panels. The solid line takes into account both the BH and t he stellar potential. The dotted line only includes the stella r potential while the dashed line takes into account only the potential o f the central BH. Fig. . The minimum Qvalue for the CN disk with dier ent masses and radii. The upperleft upperright lowerl eft and lowerright panels show the results of model S S cS and cS respectively. The thick solid line indicates Q . The dot ted lines and thin solid lines correspond to contours for Q and Q . The levels are separated by logQ .. Open circles denote CN disks observed in CO emission by Young . The rest of the symbols show the mass and size of the CN disk es timated from the optical color excess of dusty disks observe d with HSTTomita et al. . Solid triangles and open squares cor respond to the galaxies whose prole has been tted with a S e rsic law and a coreS ersic law respectively Ferrarese et al. Lauer et al. open diamonds mark galaxies with unclassied p roles. NGC which has been observed both in CO Young and withHSTTomita et al. is connected with a dotted line. ..Stability of CN Disks with Various Masses and Radii In this section we again consider the four models shown in Table but study the stability of the CN disks with dierent masses and radii. Figure shows the Q value for the CN disks with radii in the range of . kpc and masses spanning log MdM . Here the gure shows the minimum Qvalue in each model. For example Qmin. atrd pc for model cS in Figure . Kawata Cen and Ho As expected CN disks with higher gas mass and smaller radii are more unstable. Comparison between S and S demonstrates that for two CN disks with the same mass and radius in a S ersiclaw galaxy the disk in the higher mass galaxy is always more stable due to the higher mass BH and the more centrally concentrated stellar density prole. If the CN disk is smaller than the break radius the highest mass model i.e. model cS is the most stable. For a CN disk with a size compara ble to the break radius model cS leads to a less stable condition than model S and for the larger CN disk model cS is as stable as model S. Therefore for large CN disks in high mass galaxies the size of the disk with respect to the break radius of the host galaxies is an important factor for the stability. .DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS Our analysis of the stability of CN disks reveals the following trends. The CN disk is stabilized by the presence of the central BH. Since higher mass galaxies tend to have more massive BHs the CN disk is more stable in higher mass galaxies in general. The stellar potential is also important for the sta bility of the CN disk. For S ersiclaw galaxies the CN disk is more stable in higher mass galaxies because they tend to have more centrally concentrated stellar density proles. The existence of a central stellar core in luminous ellipticals makes the CN disk unstable especially around the break radius. As discussed in Section the central surface bright ness proles for relatively lowmass galaxies Ms M are generally described by the S ersic law with the trend of higher mass galaxies tending to have larger ns. Points above indicate that CN disks in lower mass galaxies are more unstable. On the other hand rela tively highmass galaxies log MsM tend to have stellar density proles that contain a central core which leads to a more unstable CN disk compared to the S ersic law. On the other hand since such systems also have more massive BHs CN disks in higher mass galax ies are kept stable especially within the break radius. These trends can explain the observational trends out lined in Section . Because CN disks are more stable in more luminous ellipticals this provides a natural expla nation for central star formation to be curtailed in giant ellipticals whereas less luminous ellipticals apparentl y have host nuclear star formation with greater ease even though cold ISM in the form of dusty nuclear disks are observed to be just as prevalent in both environments. It is also worth stressing that as seen in Figure the CN disk can remain stable even if the density of the disk is more than Mpcwithin pc. This is because the BH stabilizes the CN disk in the central region as seen in Figure . This density is much higher than the canonical density threshold for star formation suggested by both observations Kennicutt and theory e.g. Schaye thMpc. Our stability analysis oers a simple explanation for the lack of starformation e.g. Okuda et al. Young in CN disks that otherwise have high densities. At a xed total stellar mass for the host galaxy galax ies with higher nsS ersic law have more stable CN disks while the coreS ersic law leads to more unstable CN disks than the S ersic law. Therefore the frequency of central star formation activity should depend on both the cen tral stellar density prole as well as the BH mass. Re cent nearultraviolet observations performed with Galaxy Evolution Explorer GALEX indicate that some frac tion of earlytype galaxies have a small amount of recent star formation Yi et al. . Based on semianalytic model predictions Schawinski et al. demonstrate that the observed nearultraviolet color distributions of earlytype galaxies can be explained if there is a criti cal BH mass at the xed velocity dispersion for galaxies that have recent star formation. They suggested that the critical BH mass likely comes from strong AGN heating created by the massive BH e.g. Binney Tabor Silk Rees Kawata Gibson Springel et al. Croton et al. Bower et al. Ciotti Os triker . However our study demonstrates that the existence of a critical condition for star formation at the xed velocity dispersion can be due to the stability of the CN disk which is governed by both the stellar density prole andthe BH mass. As mentioned in Section the size and mass of the CN disk have been measured by several observational stud ies. Some of these measurements are plotted in Figure to compare with our model predictions. The circles in Figure correspond to objects whose CN disk mass and radius were estimated from CO emission observed with interferometers in Young . Figure also con tains objects whose disk properties were estimated from the color excess of dust features measured in optical im ages of the central region of earlytype galaxies observed with the HSTTomita et al. . The stellar density proles of the central region for the majority of the galax ies in Tomita et al. have been studied by Ferrarese et al. andor Lauer et al. . This allows us to further distinguish the objects by their central prole type. Following Section we estimated the stellar mass from the Bband luminosity assuming a stellar mass tolight ratio of BMsLBLB . The Bband luminosities come from the NASAIPAC Extragalactic Database NED. We plot the data for galaxies with masses log MsM. and log MsM. in the upperleft and lowerright panels of the gure re spectively the rest of galaxies are shown in both the upperright and lowerleft panels. Only one objectNGC has been measured with both techniques CO from Young and dust from Tomita et al. the two data points are con nected with the dotted line. Young obtained a much higher gas mass of .Mwithin . kpc compared with a mass of .Mwithin . kpc in Tomita et al. . The orderofmagnitude discrep ancy in mass cannot be explained by the slightly dierent distances adopted by these authors Mpc by Young Tomita et al. nd that some galaxies in their sample have irregular dust morphology. Figure only shows data for galax ies whose dust morphology is classied a disk.Stability of Circumnuclear Disk in Ellipticals and . Mpc by Tomita et al. . It is note worthy that allof the COmeasured CN disks have sys tematically larger disk masses than the dustmeasured systems suggesting that at least part of the discrepancy may be due to systematic errors in the estimated gas masses. Both sets of observations require a conversion factor to arrive at a gas mass. In the case of the CO observations a standard Galactic COtoH conversion factor was adopted. The COtoH conversion factor however may be systematically lower in regions of high metallicity Arimoto et al. as is the case in the cen tral regions of massive galaxies a suggestion supported by radiative transfer calculations in numerical simula tions of CN disks Wada Tomisaka . If this is the case then the gas masses from Young are overestimated. A similar caveat applies to the gas masses estimated from the dust extinction which assume a Galactic gas todust mass ratio Tomita et al. . However dust mass estimated from optical extinction should be consid ered as lower limit to the true dust masses Goudfrooij de Jong Tran et al. Martel et al. . For example Goudfrooij de Jong show that the dust masses derived from the farinfrared emission are roughly an order of magnitude higher than those es timated from optical extinction alone. They argue that the optical extinction may underestimate the dust mass by about factor of due to the assumption that the dust is in front of the stars see also Martel et al. who claim that this eect is more signicant. Goudfrooij de Jong also discuss that the discrepancy in the estimated dust mass is mainly due to the presence of dif fusely distributed dust which cannot be seen as optical extinction. We note however that such a diuse com ponent is unlikely to be present as a rotating disk as it is more likely to be supported by velocity dispersion. In any case it seems plausible that the gas masses derived from the optical dust features may be an underestimate of the true gas mass thereby narrowing the disagree ment with the CObased masses. Until more accurategas masses are available it is dicult to draw more quan titative comparisons between our model predictions and observations. It is clear from inspection of Figure that once the mass of the CN disk becomes high enough the disk will inevitably become unstable for star formation one of the consequences of which may be to aid gas fueling to the AGN Wada . This type of situation is likely to be realized in the aftermath of a gasrich major merger whereby the large amount of the gas dissipated toward the center can generate a highmass CN disk. High resolution millimeter observations of luminous infrared galaxies indeed suggest that systems with larger cen tral gas surface densities tend to either form stars with greater eciency or have a higher probability of hosting an AGN Bryant Scoville . Finally we speculate that star formation induced in an unstable CN disk may be directly related to the forma tion of kinematically decoupled cores KDCs that are often seen in the centers of earlytype galaxies e.g. Ko rmendy Bender Bender Surma Caon et al. . One of the intriguing clues regarding the ori gin of KDCs is that large cores are always old McDermid et al. . If KDCs are a byproduct of unstable CN disks then large KDCs require large massive CN disks which probably can only be formed through major gas rich mergers which are most prevalent at earlier epochs. This research has made use of the NASAIPAC Extra galactic Database NED which is operated by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory California Institute of Technol ogy under contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. This work is supported in part by grants NNGGKG and AST. The work of L. C. H. is supported by the Carnegie Institution of Washington and by NASA grants from the Space Tele scope Science Institute operated by AURA Inc. under NASA contract NAS. 