 The dynamics of dark matter DM halos in the Cold Dark Matter CDM cosmology can be easily formulated as the classical Newtonian Nbody problem. Yet the un derstanding of the equilibrium conguration of the DM halos dees a simple analytical approach. The lack of analytical understanding is often compensated for by numerical simulations which provide empirical knowl edge. The cumulative work in cosmology over the last decade or so has led to a broad consensus about two ba sic facts that describe the equilibrium structure of DM halos. One is that the sphericallyaveraged density pro ler is well approximated by the socalled NFW pro le Navarro et al. or some close variants of it Moore et al. Jing Suto Klypin et al. . The other is the power law behavior of the phase space density prole namely Qr rrr with . where r is the velocity dispersion Taylor Navarro . Two seemingly orthogonal approaches to the prob lem of the origin of the equilibrium structure in DM halos exist. One assumes a monolithic col lapse of a halo that can be approximated by the spherical infall model Gunn Gott . The ap plication of the model to the cosmological context where the shell crossing has to be explicitly accounted for has resulted in the socalled secondary infall Racah Institute of Physics Hebrew University Jerusalem Israel Department of Physics and Astronomy University of Ken tucky Lexington KY USA Department of Physics Georgia Southern University State s boro GA USAmodel hereafter SIM Gunn Fillmore Goldreich Bertschinger Homan Shaham Ryden Gunn Zaroubi Homan Nusser Lokas Homan . The SIM has been tested against the Nbody simulations and has proven to faith fully reproduce the density prole of simulated DM halos Quinn et al. Efstathiou et al. Crone et al. Ascasibar et al. . A closely related vari ant of the SIM replaces its dependence on the primor dial overdensity of the protohalo by the mass accre tion history MAH of the halo Nusser Sheth Lu et al. SalvadorSol e et al. . The SIM and its MAH variant can reproduce also the power law be havior of the phasespace density Austin et al. Gonz alezCasado et al. . However a close inspection of the Nbody simu lations reveals that a DM halo evolves very dier ently from a monolithic quasispherical collapse. In fact halos are numerically observed to go through a sequence of mergers some labeled as major merg ers in which the two main progenitors are of a sim ilar mass leading to emergence of the NFW den sity prole Syer White Dekel et al. Subramanian et al. . RomanoDiaz et al. hereafter Paper I and II studied the formation and equilibrium conguration of halos by means of con trolled Nbody simulations with the initial conditions set by constrained realizations of Gaussian elds. These simulations were designed to address issues of how the merging history aects the DM halos. The emerging pic ture is that of a halo evolving viaa sequence of quiescent phases of a slow mass accretion intermitted by violent episodes of major mergers. In the quiescent phases the Homan et al. density is well tted by an NFW prole the inner NFW scale radius Rsand the mass enclosed within it Ms re main constant and the virial radius Rvir grows linearly with the expansion parameter a. In the violent phases the halos are not in a dynamical equilibrium but are rather in a transition state resulting in a discontinuous growth of RsandRvir. In such a picture a halo is dened in the context of a merger tree at any given time it is taken as the most massive progenitor along the branch leading to the nal halo. A direct comparison between the SIM and nu merical simulations has been conducted recently by Ascasibar et al. . This comparison is based on selecting the DM halos from a cosmological simulation tracing them back in time and recovering their individ ual initial conditions. The SIM has been applied to the primordial density proles and their virial density pro les have been calculated for dierent redshifts. The SIM calculated proles provided a good match to the evolu tion and structure of the simulated clusters. This is en couraging. However a rigorous fundamental theory that can accommodate both the spherical monolithic collapse and the major mergerdriven evolution exhibited by the simulations is still missing. This motivates us to look further into the phenomenology of the phasespace den sity to gain a further insight into this seemingly simple yet complicated problem. The study of the DM halo evolution has been heav ily focused on the density prole while the evolution of the phasespace density has been largely ignored. Peirani de Freitas Pacheco presented one of the few studies of Qr evolution. They found that Q de ned as a global quantity characterizing the halo as a whole is generally decreasing with time. Specically it exhibits an early rapid decrease at redshifts zgreaterorsimilar. and a late slow decrease. Here we aim at studying the evo lution of the phasespace density within the framework of the NFW scaling and the dynamical picture formu lated in Papers I and II. In particular we shall rely on the empirical fact that the dynamics of the DM halos is constrained by a new invariant of motion. This invari ant tags a halo along the main branch of the merging tree. The NFW scaling and this invariant of motion pro vide a full description of the cosmological evolution of the phasespace density for individual halos. The structure of the paper is as follows. The analysis of the DM halos in Papers I and II is briey reviewed in . General considerations of the evolution of DM halos are given in . The evolution of the phasespace density prole is described in and selfsimilarity and scaling relations are given in . A general discussion follows in . .NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS In Papers I and II we investigated the cosmological evolution and structure of ve DM halos by setting the initial conditions of the simulations using constrained re alizations of Gaussian elds. Our basic motivation was to perform controlled numerical experiments designed to study the dependence of the evolution and structure of a given halo on its merging history. The Homan Ribak algorithm of constrained realizations of Gaussian elds has been used to set up the initial conditions. Pa pers I and II present the analysis of ve dierent models of a given DM halo evolving along various merging histories. The models were simulated within the frame work of the open CDM OCDM model with . h . and . where is the current cosmologi cal matter density parameter and is the variance of the density eld convolved with a tophat window of radius hMpc used to normalize the power spectrum. This model is very close to the concordance CDM model in its dynamical properties. The models are labeled as OCDMa OCDMb etc. following the notations of Pa pers I and II. Here we add a new model run within the at cosmology with the parameters of the WMAP three years data base Spergel et al. . The con straints used to set the model are similar to OCDMa and the model is labeled as WMAPa yet it is performed within a computational box and it starts from a dif ferent random realization of the initial conditions. A full description of the numerical simulations the application of the algorithm of constrained realizations and the nu merical code are given in Papers I and II. The WMAPa model is one in a series of runs in the WMAP cosmology to be reported in a forthcoming paper. The NFW tting algorithm is described in Paper II and the phasespace density power law prole is tted in a similar way. .GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS The density prole of DM halos is well approximated by the NFW prole r s rRs rRs in which the characteristic density s and scale radius Rs dene the NFW prole. Dening the halo as a col lection of particles in a spherical say volume in which the mean density equals some critical overdensity which is in general redshift dependent times the mean cosmo logical density the virial mass Mvir and radius Rvir of the halo are determined. It follows that RvirandRs or equivalently MvirandMs are the two independent parameters that dene an NFW halo. Assuming the NFW parameterization we can write the phasespace density prole as Qr QsQr Rs where Qx xsparenleftbig xsparenrightbig Qss s sis the mean velocity dispersion within Rsandx rRs. To the extent that the DM halos are tted by the NFW prole their Qx prole should obey a universal relation. Their cosmological evolution is then determined by the evolution of Qs. .EVOLUTION OF PHASESPACE DENSITY PROFILES Evolution of the dimensionless phasespace density prole Qx is presented in Fig. where the QrRs proles of all models are evaluated at dierent epochs covering the time interval from z . z . for the WMAa model to the present epoch. Fig. clearlyEvolution of phasespace density in dark matter halos Fig. . The cosmological evolution of the dimensionless phasespa ce density prole QrRs of the ve OCDM and the one CDM halos. The QrRs prole is plotted for a sample of snapshots for all the OCDM a nd the WMAPa models. The value of for each snapshot is indicated. The six panels correspond to the die rent models. The universal form of QrRs is clearly exhibited. shows that the phasespace density of DM halos follows a power law with .. in the quiescent phases The lack of the cosmological evolution of is shown in Fig. where is plotted against the cosmological ex pansion parameter afor all the models. This gure also displays the cosmological evolution of the QrRs pro le which is given by Qs. The Qsa curves are noisy but a clear and a striking trend can be observed subject to a jitter Qsremains constant in the quiescent phases and drops discontinuously in the transitions from one quiescent phase to the next one which are induced by the violent events. In the violent phases the NFW tting breaks down and the widely oscillating values of Qsare clearly not physical. A close inspection of the halo evolution reveals that the product ssRsremains approximately invariant as the halo evolves along the main branch of its merg ing tree Fig. . The value of suctuates around its mean of two dierent modes. In the quiescent phases sundergoes fast and correlated uctuations of a small amplitude see next section and Paper II. In the vio lent episodes it exhibits large deviations from the mean value. This behavior is associated with timings of major mergers when halos are far from the equilibrium. The NFW tting fails here and the resulting NFW param eters are illdened. Ignoring the spikes of the violent phases and averaging over the jittery uctuations in the quiescent phases sretains its value along the halo evo lution. While the invariance of sin a given quiescent phase is not surprising its ability to retain the value in the major merger events is not obviously expected. .SELFSIMILARITY AND SCALING RELATIONS Assuming the empirical nding of sinvariance we shall study its ramications for the evolution of the phasespace density. In the quiescent phases in which the density follows the NFW prole a halo is expected to be in virial equilibrium as corrobrated by Fig. ofPaper II. In particular the virial ratio evaluated within Rs should have a constant value namely s MsRsconst. The virial ratio diers from unity because the inner part of the halo does not constitute an isolated system and its value depends on the shape of the density prole. Assuming the constancy of the virial ratio within Rs and the invariance of s ssMss Rs sR s s. The evolution of the phasespace density prole in a given halo is described by Qr sR sparenleftBigr RsparenrightBig . Consequently for a given halo the following invariance holds QsR sconst. This prediction has been tested against the ve models of Papers I and II and the CDM halo. Fig. shows the cosmological evolution of QsandQsR sof these models. As with all other quantities that characterize the DM halos the product QsR sshows a jittery be havior in the quiescent phases and strong uctuations in the violent phases in which the NFW parameters are ill dened. Apart from this it remains constant through out the evolution. Only Model B shows a very slight increase in the long quiescent phase that follows its last major merger. ThesRsinvariance is to be distinguished from the sRm sscaling found in its the lowamplitude jitter Paper II and from MsR sof Zhao et al. . In Paper II we show that m. in the last quiescent phases of various halos while at early times m.. Homan et al. Fig. . The cosmological evolution of the phasespace density pro le of the main halo of the six models. The upper panel shows the dependence of Qson the expansion parameter a. The middle panel shows the cosmological evolution of the pr oduct QsR s. To a good approximation the product is invariant. The lower panel pre sents the evolution of the slope of the Qr prole. The slopes of all the models converge to .. This stands in good agreement with Zhao et al.s . in the slow accretion phase and . in the rapid accretion phase. The m. scaling is ob tained by analyzing each quiescent phase and it reects the uctuations of sandRsaround their mean values within that phase. This correlation appear to be driven by density uctuations that originate in the region be tween the cusp and Rs where the density slope varies between and . The mean values of sandRschange from one quiescent phase to another. The m. reects the variation across the dierent phases. The as sociation of the m. and . with the early times of the evolution of halos stems from the fact that the violent phases are more abundant at early times. The combined analysis of Paper II and the present work yields the following picture. In the quiescent phases the values ofsandRsuctuate around constant values yet their product remains invariant along the evolution of a halo. The sinvariance implies that MsR s. This is very close to the MsR. sof Zhao et al. and the minor discrepancy results from Zhao et al. not separating explicitly between the quiescent and violent phases. We therefore support and validate one of Zhao et al.s main points namely the MsR sscaling and set . Thus we validate also Zhao et al.s relation between the evolution of the concentration parameter and the MAH. Moreover this relation can be easily extended to the MAH Qsrelation given the QsR sinvariance. A nal note concerns the entropy of a system of self gravitating collisionless particles. The denition of the entropy per particle of a monoatomic ideal gas is givein by skBlnQ const where kBis the Boltzmann constant e.g. Dalcanton Hogan White Narayan . Applying this denition to the DM particles provides one with a formal entropy of the DM. Our ndings concerning structure and evolution of the phasespace density can be easily translated to the language of theEvolution of phasespace density in dark matter halos Fig. . The product ssRsis plotted against the expansion parameter afor the six halo models. The panels present the individual models. sexhibits a jittery behavior in the quiescent phases and the l arge spikes correspond to the violent epochs in which the NFW tting is illdened. Apart from these sremains approximately constant throughout the evolution. entropy of the DM. It should be noted here that Eq. provides a local measure of the entropy. The long range nature of the gravitational interactions prohibits a simple extension of the entropy to an extensive quantity that characterizes the whole halo. Within this framework we can only refer to the entropy as a local property. .DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS The main elements of the structure and evolution of the DM halos can be summarized as follows. Halos evolve through two phases quiescent and violent ones which represent the two extreme cases of smooth accretion and major mergers. In the quiescent phase the halo density distribution is closely approximated by the NFW pro le. The inner within Rs halo mass surface density s remains approximately constant throughout its en tire evolution. Most importantly the major mergers that take the halo from one quiescent phase to the other pre serve the value of s. During the quiescent phases the halo phasespace density prole follows a power law of the form Qr QsrRswith.. The cosmo logical evolution of the phase space density is given by Qs. Under the invariance of sand the assumption of the virial equilibrium within Rs the evolution of Qsis dictated by Rs so that QsR s. In the quiescent phases Qsremains constant and it decreases discontin uously in the violent phases. The sinvariance and the virial theorem Eq. imply that the evolution of a halo proceeds while conserving its surface density and its energy per unit volume or equiv alently the pressure within Rs. The interesting pointis that a typical halo undergoes a few violent events of major merging that destroy its equilibrium. Following each event it regains the NFW structure with a larger Rs while preserving its pressure and the mean surface density within the new Rs. Summarizing a DM halo evolves along a sequence of NFW proles with an ever increasing RvirandRsthat grows only discontinuously in the manner described in Paper I while conserving the mean surface density and the pressure within Rs. The evolution of the Qr prole of a given DM halo is predicted by Eq. . The controlled numerical experi ments of Papers I and II suggest that for a given halo sremains constant over a few quiescent phases inter mitted by violent events. All the halos analyzed here apart from WMAPa emerge from the same realiza tion of the initial conditions that has been subjected to dierent constraints. In many ways these halos can be considered as a single halo that has been manipulated so as to modify its merging history. As such they all have roughly the same value of s. The WMAPa model pro vides an independent realization of a DM halo in a dier ent cosmology. The value of sis roughly twice as large than in all the other model. Of course the extremely poor statistics of our models cannot teach us about the scatter in s. The question arises as to what happens in the general case of a large ensemble of DM halos drawn from a large cosmological simulation. The scatter in s is expected to determine the evolutionary tracks of the phasespase density proles. It is interesting to study the possible environment scorrelation and to what extent this aects the evolution of the DM halos. Homan et al. ThesRsinvariance implies that the Zhao et al. MsR sscaling holds with and so does the MAH concentration parameter relation. It follows that this can be easily extended to calculate a similar MAH Qs relation. The interesting ramication of this result is that any statistical algorithm for generating DM halos merging trees andor MAHs can be extended so as to provide the evolution of the full NFW parameters of a halo along its merging tree. This can be used in semi analytical modeling of galaxy formation in which realiza tions of merging trees include the full NFW structure of the halos. The denition of Qr as a phasespace density is only a poor mans substitute for the real phasespace den sity in the sixdimensional phase space. Yet pushing the analogy further on a formal entropy is dened by Eq. as a local variable. This local denition cannot be ex tended to provide a global entropy of the halo. It follows that statements regarding the evolution of the entropy of DM halos are illdened at least in the current context. Nevertheless in the NFW scaling framework in which the entropy of DM halos is taken as Qs it increases with Rs. In this context the quiescent phases with Rsconst. correspond to adiabatic processes which preserve the en tropy and the violent phases to nonadiabatic ones in which the entropy grows. The method of introducing an entropy by means of Eq. can be considered as only formal and its relation to a standard thermodynamics needs to be questioned. Yet Faltenbacher et al. have recently shown that the formally dened entropy of the DM is very closely as sociated with the classical ideal gas entropy of the in tergalactic gas in clusters of galaxies. Faltenbacher et al . studied the entropy of the gas and DM in high reso lution adiabatic SPH cosmological simulations adiabatic here is used in the sense that the entropy of the gas can only grow due to shock waves. Consequently following the accepted notation the entropy of the gas can be expressed by means of KgaskBT and by analogy KDM DM DMQ. The power law behavior of Qr implies that KDMr.. Interestingly outside the entropy core of rRs the gas entropy fol lows the DM namely KgasKDM and the calculated slope agrees well with observations. Faltenbacher et al. amended the denition of Kgas such that the thermal en ergy is extended to include the kinetic energy of the small scale turbulent motion and the DM and gas densities are normalized by their mean cosmological values. The newly dened Kgasthen coincides with the DM entropy outside the entropy core to a very good approximation. The analysis of Faltenbacher et al. shows that at least in galaxy clusters the DM entropy coincides with the classical ideal gas entropy of the intracluster medium. It is not clear a priori why the gas and DM entropies should coincide but numerical simulations suggest that they do. The simulations suggest that observational de termination of the entropy of the intracluster gas should shed light and constrain the behavior of the DM entropy. We thank Ran Rubin for his help with the calcula tion of the phase space density prole. Fruitful discus sions with Yuval Birnboim Adi Nusser Noam Soker and Saleem Zaroubi are gratefully acknowledged. This re search has been supported by ISF and the Shein born Foundation to YH by NASALTSA NASAATP NAG HSTAR to IS and by NSFAST to CH and IS. 