 Dusty intensely starforming galaxies SFR Myr are the dominant contributors to the z. cosmic SFR densitye.g.Floreset al.Elbazet al.Pozzi et al. Le Flochet al. . The thermal dust emission from these galaxies accounts for much of the cosmic IR background which contains half of the radiation energy of the extragalactic background light HauserDwek Lagacheet al. Doleetal.. Thereforeunderstand ingtheIRSEDsofthedustystarforminggalaxiesisessenti al for mapping the evolution of star formation as a function of cosmic time and is a key observationalingredient of our un derstandingofgalaxyevolution. Detailed studies of the IR SEDs over the full range of m have only been carried out for nearby galaxies e.g. Daleet al. nding that the IR SED shape is cor related with dust temperature Soifer Neugebauer Dale Helou Chapmanet al. Lagacheetal. . Interestingly despite this diversity of SED shapes local galaxies midIR m luminosities are tightly correlated with their total IR luminosities with a scatter of.dex CharyElbaz Papovich Bell Takeuchiet al.b Daleet al.. Thislocalobservation has often been used as a key as sumptioninstudiesexploitingdeepmidIRimagingfromthe Infrared Space Observatory at m and the Spitzer Space Telescope atme.g.Floreset al.Zhengetal. MaxPlanck Institut f ur Astronomie K onigstuhl D Heidel berg Germany Purple Mountain Observatory BeijingWest Road Nanjing P. R.China xzzhengpmo.ac.cn Institut dAstrophysique Spatiale IAS bat F Orsay France Universit e ParisSud and CNRS UMR Spitzer Fellow Institute for Astronomy University of Haw aii Woodlawn Drive Honolulu HI Steward Observatory University ofArizona NCherry Av eTucson AZ Department of Astronomy Columbia University New YorkNY Hammeret al. Bell et al. Melbourneet al. . Such studies have found signicantly enhanced star formation at .lessorsimilarzlessorsimilar compared to the present day. Yet this conclusion rests critically on the extent to which midIR luminosities reect the total IR luminosity. Unfor tunately only a small fraction of midIR detected sources can be individually detected in the farIR bandse.g. Spitzer m owing to limited signaltonoise ratio S N and source confusion Doleet al. b Frayeret al. . Thus testing of this key assumption remains limited to the brightest sources e.g. Sajinaet al. Borysetal. or is indirect e.g. Appletonet al. Yanet al. Popeet al. Marcillacet al.. Thegoalofthispaperis toexploretheaverageIRSEDsof astellarmasslimitedsample z.galaxiesintheextended ChandraDeep FieldSouthECDFS.In previousworks we have shown that stacking noiselimited images of a set of galaxies allows one to securely detect the mean ux of the galaxy set substantially below the individual detection li mit Zhenget al.Doleet al.. Herewestackatlonger wavelengths i.e. m and m to empirically deter minethe populationaveragedIRSED. We combinethese re sults with morphologies and average uxes at shorter wave lengths to place constraints on the dust extinction and SED s ofthesegalaxies. In wedescribethemultiwavelengthdata used to construct galaxy SEDs and the samples of z. galaxies. presents our stacking methods. In particular we test the results of stacking noise and confusion limited and m images. In we present the properties of the average SEDs. Discussion and conclusion are given in . Throughoutthispaperweassume M..and HkmsMpcfor aCDM cosmology. All magni tudes are given in the Vega system except where otherwise specied. .THEDATAANDSAMPLES ..Thedata Zhengetal. WeuseSpitzerandmdatatostudythethermal dust emission of z. galaxies. In addition we include deep ultraviolet data from the Galaxy Evolution Explorer GALEX Martinet al. a optical data from the Classi fying Objects by MediumBand Observations COMBO Wolf etal. survey and four band . . . and .mInfraredArrayCameraIRACFazioet al.data to construct the stellar SED of a galaxy. These data cover wavelength range from . m to m in the observed frame equal to the restframe range . tom for z.. TheCOMBOsurveyhasimagedthe .ECDFS in ve broad UBVRandI and medium optical bands providinghighqualityastrometryuncertainties .based onaverydeep Rbandimagemagatthe limitphoto metric redshifts zz. atmR Wolf etal. and stellar masses Borchet al. for galaxies with mR. We use the photometric redshift and stellarmasscatalogstoselect galaxysamples. GALEX ultraviolet observations provided deep far ultraviolet FUV and nearultraviolet NUV imagescenteredontheECDFS.TheFUVand NUVimageshaveaeldofviewofonesquaredegreeatypi calpointspreadfunctionPSFoffullwidthathalfmaxim um FWHM a resolution of .pixeland a depth of .Jyatthelevel. Thedatareductionandsourcedetec tionisdescribedinMorrisseyet al.. The deep IRAC . . . and . m imaging data and MIPS and m imaging data were obtained as part of the rst run of MIPS GTO observations Rieke etal. . A rectangular eld of was observed in all bands with small shifts between di erent bands. The eective exposure time is s for the four IRAC band im agesspixforMIPS m spixformand spixfor m. IRAC . and . m images have a PSF of FWHM. and .and .m imageshavea PSF ofFWHM.Huanget al.. The mimagehasa PSF of FWHM. Sources are detected at m down to JyatcompletenessseePapovichet al.forde tailsofdatareductionsourcedetectionandphotometry. The m image is characterized by a PSF of FWHM and a resolution of .pixel. The m image has a PSF of FWHMand a resolution of pixel. Sources with uxes of fmJy can be individually resolved at m and offmJy at m see Doleet al. a for details. WetakeCOMBOastrometryasthereferencecoordinate andcrosscorrelateallotherbandcatalogswiththeCOMBO catalog. In each crosscorrelationwe use bright stars a nd compactsourcestoestimate thesystematico setsanduncer tainties between two coordinates. A position tolerance of uncertaintyisadoptedsothatobjectsinthetwocatalogsha v ingcoincidentcoordinateswithin the tolerancecorrecte dfor the systematic osets areidentied asthe same objects. The nearest COMBO object is chosen if multiple ones exist within the tolerance. The adopted tolerances are . FUV .NUV..m..m ..and.m and . m. For the and m catalogs we rstly crosscorrelate them with the m catalog as individually detected and m sources are bright at m we then associateand mobjectswithCOMBOobjectsus ing the coordinatesof the corresponding m sources. The tolerancebetween andmis respectively....... log MMO ..... U V restES IrrPec Spiral wo m detection Fig. . The restframe color UVversus stellar mass for a sample of galaxies of known GEMS morphology in the redshift sli cez. .. Open symbols show the objects detected individually at m f Jy and skeletal symbols represent individuallyundetect ed ones. Most red UV. ellipticallenticular galaxies and blue UV. small MM spiralirregularpeculiar galaxies are not individually detected at m. The number of objects in each category is given in the brack ets. Thedashedline shows the mass cut MMthat we apply in the subsequent analysis. ..Thesamples We combine spectroscopic redshifts from the VLT VI MOS Deep Survey LeF evreet al. and the GOODS survey Vanzellaet al. with photometric red shifts from the COMBO survey Wolf et al. to se lect sample galaxies. The ECDFS has HST imaging from the Galaxy EvolutionfromMorphologyand SEDs Rixet al. GEMS Survey. Visually classied morphologies are available for galaxies with mR in a thin redshift slicez.. Bell et al. . Of the galaxies galaxieshaveallobservationsincludingGALEXIRAC and MIPS observations. To avoid contamination from active galacticnucleiAGNsweremoveXraydetectedsources intheChandraksobservationLehmeret al. leav ing a sample of galaxies. Spectroscopic redshifts are available for of the sample galaxies. The contribution fromthe XrayundetectedAGNstothe total m luminos ity ofz galaxiesis suggestedto be Zhenget al. Brandet al.. Thiswillnothavesignicante ects onourresults. ThesampledemographicsareshowninFigure. Thesam ple is limited by Rband apparent magnitude mR cor respondingtoapproximatelytherestframe Bbandatz.. Accordinglythecompletenessofthesampleintermsofste l lar mass is a strong function of color the mass limit for red old or dusty galaxies is MMwhereas blue galax iescanbeincludeddowntoalmost MM. We choose to impose a stellar mass cut of MMin what fol lows not only are almost all m emitters above this mass cut but also the completeness of this sample is not a strong function of color i.e. age or dust obscuration. We also se lect another sample to explore the relationship between the IR SED shape and m luminosity we extend the redshiftInfraredSEDsof z.StarFormingGalaxies m m m simulated m Simulated m Fig. . Observed MIPS and m image sections in the extended CDFS and simulated and m images. The simulated and mimages are created by degrading the mimage to the and mresolution. No additional noise is added to thesimulated i mages. slice to .z. to increase the number of sample galax ies. The nal sample then comprisessome galaxieswith MMin the redshift range . z.. Of them are individuallydetected at m with uxes in excess ofJy none is individually detected at or m. Xraydetectedsourceshavebeenexcluded. .IMAGE STACKING As outlined earlier current missions are unable to yield individual detections for the vast majority of intermediat e redshiftobjectsatfarIRwavelengthsowingbothtocontr ibu tionsfrominstrumentalnoiseandconfusionnoise. Inorder to placeconstraintsontheshapeoftheIRSEDsoftypicalsta r forming intermediate redshift galaxies stacking on the po si tions of known starforming galaxies can lower the e ective noise Zhenget al. allowingdetectionof the averag e galaxy. In Zhenget al. we presented a description of stacking of m data in that case to resolve the m lu minosity of dwarf galaxies we briey summarize the most important aspects of m stacking in.. The focus of this paper is stacking at longer wavelengths at m PSF FWHM andm FWHMdiscussedin.. ..FUVNUV andMIPS m imagestacking Whilemuchofthispaperdescribesstackingresultsforsub samples that are individually detected at m some sub samples are not individually detected at m. Further more the m FUV and NUV images share many of the same characteristics the PSFs have similar FWHM and at each wavelengthgreaterorsimilar of the extragalactic background at that wavelength is resolved by these images i.e. the image s are only mildly confusionlimitede.g. Papovichetal. Xuetal. Doleet al. . Accordingly stacking of FUV NUV and m images is carried out in the same way seeZhenget al. formoredetails. Threebasic steps are adoptedto derive the mean uxesfor galaxy subsets. First we subtract all individuallydetec ted sources from the images. This is done using the software tool STARFINDERDiolaitiet al. with an empiri cal PSF constructed from bright point sources at mFUVNUV respectively. Then we performmean stack of the residual image postage stamps centered on the opti calcoordinatesoftheobjectsthatareindividuallyundete cted in the subset of interest. An aperture of is used to in tegrate the central ux of the meanstacked image and esti matethebackgroundfromtheouterregions. Aperturecorrec tions of a factor of . .. derived from the empiri cal PSF at mFUVNUV respectivelyare adoptedto cal ibrate the stacked uxes to the total uxes. Last we sum the uxes of individuallydetected sources and the stack ux of individuallyundetectedsourcesineachgalaxysubsetgi ving the mean mFUVNUV uxes. Uncertainties are derived frombootstrapping. ..MIPSandm imagestacking The m and m PSFs are considerably larger than those at shorter wavelengths yielding confused images re solving only the brightest relatively nearby sources som e of the extragalactic background at this wavelength Doleet al. a. Galaxies at .z. are heav ily confused in all but the brightest cases Doleetal. a STARFINDER gives identical results within the errors to the tool ALL STARin IRAF package. Zhengetal. . . Mean F mJy....Frecovery FMedian stack med of med BGMean stack mean of mean BG Mean stack med of mean BG m . . Mean F mJy....Frecovery FMedian stack med of med BGMean stack mean of mean BG Mean stack med of mean BG m Fig. .Recovery ofthemeanuxesof randomly distributedmsourcesthroughstacking afterconvolution tothe mleftandmrightresolution. The uxes were taken from the individuallyresolved so urces in the.. m image and were split into ux bins in the range from Jy to mJy. Thenumber of objects in each bin decreases with incre asing ux. Threemeasures of thestack ux arepresented for e ach bin the integrated central ux of themeanstack using the meanbackground for sky subtraction the integrated central ux of themeanstack using the medianbackground and the integrated central ux of the medianstack using the medianof the background see text for details. Errorbars are deri ved from bootstrapping. While the ux can be recovered with little bias at mresolution ux recovery at mleads to asystematic overestimate. TABLE Thenumbersofsourcesandaveragefluxesfor fluxbinscomposedof individually resolved msources . No. fJy Number Lagacheet al. requiringstacking to gain insig ht into their longwavelength IR SEDs see e.g. Doleetal. . ThelargeangularextentofthelongwavelengthPSFsposes a signicant challengefor those wishing to estimate their a v erage properties. At z. the PSF size of the m image FWHM correspondsto a physicalscale of kpc. For the m image PSF FWHM the correspond ing scale iskpc. Thus the stacking results are a re ection of the IRluminosity weighted twopoint correlati on functionongreaterorsimilarkpcscales overestimatingthetrueaverage uxesofthegalaxiesofinterest. In order to understand this source of systematic error in better detail we carried out some simulations where syn thetic m data using the observed positions and uxes of individuallydetected m sources are degraded in res olution to the resolution of the m and m data. For the purposesof this test we assume a constant ratio between m ux and the wavelength of interest. We explore two cases. First the positions are randomly scrambled i.e. t he relative brightnesses of galaxies are preserved but their p osi tions are random. This test gives an indication of the sys tematic eects of stacking randomlypositionedsources. The second case is when both the uxes and positions of sources are preserved. This second case is our best estimate of the likely systematic uncertainties of stacking in a realistic ally clustered case. Figure shows the m images degraded to the and m resolution respectively compared with the observed MIPS and m images. Because of confusion only a handful of bright m sources can be in dividuallyresolvedinthedegradedimages. Throughstacki ngthe mean ux can be estimated for m source subsets the accuracy of the recovery of the mean ux shows how well stackingworksat thatcorrespondingimageresolution. ...Stackingrandomly distributedsources The whole m mosaic image of the ECDFS covers a rectangular sky area of .. and contains individuallydetected sources at detection limit Jy. Thevastmajorityofthesources fJyarepoint sources. Replacing all sources with the m PSF empiri callyconstructedfrombrightstarswegeneratedanarti cial m image having the sources randomly distributed into a.. blank eld. The articial m image was then degraded to the and m image resolution respectively. The degraded images are then stacked at the m source positions giving indications as to the expected quality of stacking results at m and m. We note that the replacement of the background blank eld with the PSFsubtracted m imagehavingsomecontributionfrom individuallyundetectedsources does not modify our resu lts signicantlyinthemeanaddingonlysomemodestadditiona l scatter. The m sources were sorted into bins in ux rang ing from Jy to mJy see also Doleet al. with objects per bin at faint ux levels and lessorsimilar per bin atbrighteruxes. Thenumbersofsourcesandaverage m uxes per bin are listed in Table . In real stacks we choose to PSFsubtract out the individuallydetected sources st ack ing the remaining image in order to reduce bias from bright sources in backgroundestimates. In the real and m images we detect sources in each image. Thus weInfraredSEDsof z.StarFormingGalaxies . . Mean F mJy....Frecovery FMedian stack med of med BGMean stack mean of mean BG Mean stack med of mean BG m . . Mean F mJy....Frecovery FMedian stack med of med BGMean stack mean of mean BG Mean stack med of mean BG m Fig. .Therecovery of the mean properties of mdetected sources at their observed positions. Left Stacking results at mresolution. Right Stacking results atmresolution. Theerrorbars reect thevariance from bootst rapping. must subtract approximately this many bright sources from the simulated images before stacking to avoid unrealistica lly biasing the results. Ideally one would subtract all detect ed sources in the simulated and m images unfortu nately as the simulated and real and m images have unavoidablysomewhatdi erentnoiseandbrightnessdistri butionpropertiesthenumberofdetectedsourcesisdi erent andsubstantiallyhigherinthecaseoftheratherdeepers im ulated m data. Thus we choose to PSFsubtract the brightestsourcesthebrightestoftheoriginalbinsbe fore stackingfortheremainingbins. For each ux bin postage stamps were cut from the simu latedimagecenteredonthepositionsofthesourcesandwere stacked. The size of postagestamps is .. forthe m imageandforthemimageallowingforaproper background estimate. Two stacked images were created for each bin through averaging or medianing. For the stacked m postage stamp images an aperture of radius . is used to integrate the central stack ux and an annulus with inner radius . and outer radius . to estimate the back ground. For the stacked m postage stamp images the correspondingaperture is of radius . and the correspond ing annulus is of inner radius . and outer radius .. The mean and median of pixels in the annulus region were taken as the background of the meanstacked image for sky subtraction. Only the median nearly identical to the mean wasadoptedasthe backgroundofthemedianstackedimage. Thereforewederivethreemeasuresofthestackuxforeach subsample theintegratedcentraluxofthe meanstackusing themeanbackgroundfor sky subtraction the integrated cen tral ux ofthe meanstack using the medianbackgroundand the integrated central ux of the medianstack using the me dianof the background. Finally aperture correctionsderived from model PSFs http ssc.spitzer.caltech.edu mipspsts wereappliedtocorrecttheestimatesofstackuxtothetota l. Theaperturecorrectionis a factorof.for m .for m using the median background and . for m usingthe meanbackground. Figureshowstheresultsofstacking randomly distributed sources at and m resolution. Uncertainties are de rivedfrombootstrapping. At m resolutionthe meanux of m sources of comparable ux can be properly recovered over a ux range of one order of magnitude. At m resolutionrecovereduxesareofreasonablequalityatbr ight limitsandbecomeprogressivelymorebiasedby towards fainter limits. After some investigation it becam e clear that the the stack recovery at m is correlated with thenumberofobjectsinthestackbin. Theincreaseofobject s in number leads to an increase of the overlap between these objects within a xed area. This increasing overlap leads to an increase of the stack ux relative to the input ux. By stacking a number of identical sources without background andforegroundsourcesweobtainedsimilarresultsasshow n in Figure . Indeeda point sourcecontains of its ux in an area of . arcminin the m imaging and an area of .arcmininthemimaging. Tollina ..eldit requires around m sources or m sources compared to objects in the stack bins. There forethestackresultsat marelittleaectedbytheoverlap between the stack objects but the stack results at m are signicantlyinuencedforstackbinsof objects. The three measures of the stack ux are nearly identical withintheerrorbars forsimulated mstackingand slightly dierent for simulated m stacking in particular for the low ux bins although the scatter is signicant . Note that we dividedsourcesintostack binsin terms oftheiruxes. Forthestackbinshavingsourceswhoseuxes span a wide range the median stack substantially underesti matesthemeanux. ...Stackingsources at their observed positions Inordertobuildamorerealisticpictureoftheexpectedun certaintiesfrom stacking at m and m we repeat the last analysis except we keep both the uxes and positions of the sources xed to those observed at m. This gives in sightintotheinuenceofclusteringontheresults. Inthis test the observed m map was degraded to the and m resolution respectively as shown in Figure . As previousl y sourcesweresplitintobinsin muxandthestacking results for each ux bin were calculated. Figure shows the results. Comparing the results with Figure one can clearl y see that the mean and median recovered uxes are signi cantly aected by the clustering of sources on the sky. In general our test suggests that stacking subsets of m and Zhengetal. . . . . Rest Wavelength mL LO Spiral ES IrrPec Fig. . The average SED spanning a factor of in wavelength as a function of morphological type for m detected fJy galaxies withMMin a thin redshift slice . z.. Vertical errorbars are the uncertainties derived from bootstrapping and horizonal er rorbars show the band widths. The number of objects in each morpholog y bin is given in thebrackets. m sources may overestimate the mean ux somewhat typical biases are with uncertaintiesof order . Yet the magnitude and direction of these e ects on dierent subsamplesarediculttoestimate apriori. Figuredemon strates that from bin to bin the source clustering may lead t o eitheranincreaseoradecreaseofthemeanuxofthesource subsample depending on the actual distribution and densit y ofsourcesofdierentbrightnessesonthesky. ...Stacking z.galaxies The above tests demonstrate that it will be di cult to esti matethemeanuxat mandmtobetterthan and that the extent of the bias towards higher or lower ux is dicult to predict with accuracy. In this paper we adopt a pragmatic approach for each subsample that is stacked at m and m we attempt to derive an individual bias correction based on the m image. Sources bright at m are generally bright at and m although the m to or m ux ratio varies from object to object at a scatter at the .dex level Daleet al. . Thus we adopt the simplistic assumption that the m image can be takenasagoodproxyfortheor mimageatres olution and high S N m and m resolution images derived under this assumption Fig. appear a reasonable description of the real m and m images. Thus for a given subset of z. galaxies we estimated precisely the mean m ux from their m images. Then we de gradedthe m imagesto and m image resolution. Two stack uxes were estimated by stacking each of the two setsofdegradedimages. Bycomparingthestackuxestothe actualmeanmuxofthegalaxysubsetweobtainedem pirical corrections which were applied to the correspondi ng and m stack uxes of the subset of z. galax ies respectively. Uncertainties in this correction are ap plied also in quadrature to the derived stacking results at m andm. .RESULTS To explore the average IR SEDs of z. starforming galaxies we rst look into the dependence of the IR SED shape on galaxy morphology. Then we investigate the rela tionshipbetweentheIRSEDshapeandthe mluminosity. . . . Rest Wavelength mL LO L low L medium L high Fig..Average SEDasafunction the mluminosity forgalaxies with MMinthe redshift range. z.. Thevertical errorbars show the uncertainties and horizonal errorbars show the band widths . The galaxies are split into three bins in terms of their m luminosities L highLmedium and Llow. The numbers in brackets denote the number of objects included in each bin. andthez.IR SEDs to those of presentdaystarforming galaxies. Finally based on the IR SEDs the extrapolation of the total IR luminosity from the m luminosity is dis cussed. ..TherelationshipbetweenIRSEDandmorphology We used a sample of galaxies of known morphology to investigate the dependence of the IR SED shape on mor phology. The galaxies are classied into three mor phological types elliptical lenticular ES spiral and ir regularpeculiar. Figure shows the relationshipbetweenthe restframe color UVand stellar mass. Objects detected at m fJy are marked with open symbols and undetected ones with skeletal symbols. The detection limit of Jy correspondsto the monochromaticobservedframe m luminosityLLatz.. Them undetectedgalaxiesareintrinsicallyfaintintheIRbands see . and we excluded them in constructing these compos ite SEDs. To avoid selection bias in color see . we also excluded about one third of the m detected galaxies withMM leaving galaxiesin the nal sample. We calculated the average luminosities in bands for each subsample of mdetected galaxies FUV NUV from GALEX UBVRandIfromtheCOMBOsurveyIRAC . . . and . m MIPS and m bands. The average luminosity of each band includes contributions from both individuallydetected and individuallyundete cted sources at wavelengths other than m. Errors in the av erage luminosities were derived from bootstrapping inclu d ing contributionsto the uncertaintyfrom measurementerro rs in both the individuallydetecteduxes and the individual ly undetecteduxes. TheaverageSEDspansarangeintherest frameof.to m. Figure shows the average SEDs of the three subsam ples. Each ofthe three averageSEDs is dominatedbya dust extincted stellar spectrum at m and emission by dust atm. Irregularpeculiar galaxies show a higher ratio of dust to stellar emission compared to the spirals and E S galaxies. The slope of the IR SED restframe m is steeper for irregular peculiar galaxies somewhat interme diate for ES galaxies and lowest for spirals although the uncertaintiesofand m luminositiesarelarge. TheirInfraredSEDsof z.StarFormingGalaxies TABLE Averageluminositiesofmassive galaxysubsetsintheredshiftslice .z.. NobjlogMlogLlogLa corr. logLa corr. logLblogLIRc M L L L L L . .. ... ... .. ... .. ... . . .. ... ... .. ... .. ... . . .. ... .... ... .. ... . aThem and m luminosities estimated from stacking haveincluded the co rrections derived from degraded m images. Thecorrec tions arelisted inthe table. bLis the luminosity between to m calculated by linearly interpolating observed and m luminosities in logarithm space. cLIRrefers to the total IR luminosity between to m. Local IR SED templates from Lagacheet al. Chary E lbaz and Dale Helouareusedtottheobserveddatapoints. Th etotal IRluminosity isderivedfrom thedusttemperaturem atch templates. See text for details. regularpeculiargalaxies usually form stars in relatively con centrated regions leading to a high star formation intensi ty i.e. SFRperunitarea. Incontrastthespiralsareoftenc har acterized by a relatively low star formation intensity as th e starforming regions are widely distributed over disks. Th e star formation density for the E S galaxies is somewhat be tweenthoseoftheirregular peculiargalaxiesandspirals. The shapes of the IR SEDs are thus a function of star formation intensity in the sense that the dust temperature is primaril y colder in systems of relatively lower star formation intens ity wewill returnthistopicin . ..The relationshipbetweenIRSEDand m luminosity Weusedamasslimitedsampletostudytherelationshipbe tweenIRSEDshapeand mluminosity. Thissamplecon sists of galaxies with MMand .z.. The sample galaxies were divided into three m lumi nosity bins LhighLmedium and Llow. The rst two bins contain individuallydetected m sources fJy and all individuallyundetected m sources of the are in the third bin. The Lhigh bin is chosen to contain brightest m sources so that its total m luminosity equals that of the Lmedium bin. Con sequently the stacked and m uxes are expected to havecomparablesignaltonoiseratiosforthetwobins. Av er age luminosities in all bands were calculated for the thre e subsets of galaxies. The average luminosities in the and m bands are listed in Table along with the num berofobjectsandmeanstellarmassforeachofthethreesub sets. Theempiricalcorrectionsadoptedfortheand m stackuxessee..arealsopresented. Errorsincludethe uncertaintiesin measurementsand bootstrappingerrors. F ig ureshowstheaverageSEDfromtherestframewavelengths . to m as a a function of the m luminosity. It is clear that the observed m restframe m luminosity iscorrelatedwiththeand mIRluminositiesformas sivegalaxiesat z.inthesensethattheand mIR luminosities increase as the m luminosity increases i.e. m luminositytypicallyreectshighIRluminosityrather thananenhancedrestframemidIRexcessseealsoBavouze t et al. in preperation. The Lhigh bin has an average galaxy stellar mass .dex larger than the Lmedium bin thiscanalsobeseenfromtheredderopticalcolorsandhighe r restframem luminosity of the Lhigh bin. The L low bin contains massive galaxies that are individually undetected at m including earlytype galaxies with lit tle star formation and latetype galaxies in the quiescent s tar formation phase see Figure . The shortwavelength part. . . . . log f f ....log f f Arp. .. . . . . . . Fig. . Relative dust temperature estimate from the IR ux rati o ffversusff.Asterisks represent local starforming galaxies from Dale etal. with IRAS observations at the and m and ISO observation at m. The ratio ffis an indicator of the dust temper ature which tends to be correlated with IR luminosity in the local Universe. Thedotted lines show typical values of ffcorresponding the given logLIRL derived from IRAS data Soifer Neugebauer . These linesarearbitrarily positioned ontheYaxis. The opencircle showsthewell known local ultraluminous IR galaxy Arp. The squaresshow the three subsets of massive MM galaxies in redshift slice . z. labeled with thecorresponding IR luminosities log LIRL. Note that error barsofthetwo ux ratios arenotindependent. Thearrow indi cates theeect of an increase in fby afactor of .. of their average SED is dominated by a relatively old stellar population. The large errorbars of the and m lumi nositiescomparedtothesmallerrorbarofthe mluminos ity are partially due to the intrinsic scatter among the samp le galaxiesinthisbin. ..ComparisonwithlocalSEDs A key goal of this paper is to compare the observed av erage IR SED shapes at z. to local template SEDs. We adopted a sample of local starforming galaxies from Daleet al.with IRASandISOmobservationsand total IR luminosity m spanning from to L. Figure shows these nearby galaxies in the IR ux ratioffversusffplot. Thelocalgalaxiesdistribute Zhengetal. ..........log L high ...... log ff L medium ...... Lagache et al. Chary Elbaz Dale Helou L low ...L LO L logLIRLO . DH logLIRLO .CE logLIRLO .L high L logLIRLO . DH logLIRLO .CE logLIRLO .L medium L logLIRLO . DH logLIRLO .CE logLIRLO .L low ...L LO L logff . DH logff .CE logff . Rest Wavelength m L logff . DH logff .CE logff . L logff . DH logff .CE logff . Fig.. Fitting three sets of local templates from Lagache etal . Chary Elbaz and Dale Helou to the av erage IR SEDs of three subsets of massive MM galaxies in the redshift slice . z.. Only the three MIPS data points and m of each observed IR SED are used in the tting. Top The panels show as a function of the templates characteristic log ff. For each observed IR SED two bestt templates are chosen one is matched in luminosity i.e. with the normali zation constant equal to unity and the other is dust tempera ture match or SED shape match i.e. with the minimum .Bottom Theupper panels shows the bestt luminosity match templates and the lower panels show the bestt dust temperature match templates compared to the observed SEDs from the restfram e to m delineated by IRAC and MIPS data points for the Lhigh bin left panels the Lmedium bin middle panels and the Llow bin right panels . TheSEDs are normalized to unity at . m. Note that the stellar components of the locoal templates are somewhat arbitrarily set. Thedisagreements between theaveraged SEDsand thebestt templates at restmshould beignored. along a sequence with considerable scatter. The sequence is correlated with both dust temperature and IR luminosity. The dust temperatureand IR luminosity increase for increas ingffe.g. SoiferNeugebauer . The average IR SEDs for z. galaxies are determined by the three MIPS bands corresponding to the restframe and m bands. The m and m luminosities can be takenasrestframe mandmluminositiesforwhich Kcorrections are negligible. We estimated the restframe m luminosity by linear interpolation between the MIPS measurements in loglog space as shown in Figure . We usedthelocalsampletotestthelinearinterpolation. Firs twe derivethemuxesbylinearinterpolationbetween IRAS andmmeasurementsinloglogspace. Secondwede rivemuxesbythesamemethodbetweenand mforthelocalgalaxiesadopted. Theestimated m uxes arelowerthantheobserved IRASmuxes. This hints that our restframe m luminosities of the z. galaxies might be underestimated. We compared the z. galaxies to the local galaxies. As shown in Figure the twopopulationsareroughlylocatedinthesame regionofthe ffversusffplane. Specically the z. star forming galaxies of IR luminosity logLIRL. those in the Lhigh bin and Lmedium bin the estimates of the total IR luminosities will be discussed later popula te the relatively lowtemperature end of the template sequenc e. In the local Universe these lowtemperaturegalaxies tend to beofrelativelylowluminositylog LIRL.. Thiswith signicantuncertaintiessuggeststhatthetypicaldustt emper ature ofz. luminous IR galaxies LIRGs i.e. galaxiesInfraredSEDsof z.StarFormingGalaxies . . . . . log f f .L Lm Dale Helou Chary Elbaz Lagache et al. . . . . . log f f .L LIRm Fig. . Theratio between the restframe mto the mluminosity leftplot and to the total IR luminosity mrightplot as a function of the IR ux ratio ff.Asterisks are local galaxies collected from literature with IRAS ISO m observations and at least one observation at wavelengths longer than m.Squaresshow our results for galaxies with MMand .z.. The relations derived from SED templates are presented for comparison. One can see that the extrapolation of the restf rame m luminosity based on the three sets of templates give compar able estimates of total IR luminosity within aconsiderable scatter. Ourdatapoints d istribute within thescatter ofthelocal starforming gala xies buttowards thecolder templates. Roughly speaking a factor of is aquite good average bolometric co rrection to the estimate of the total IR luminosity from the r estframe m luminosity. Generally speaking the use of local templates of LIR.Lfor extrapolation of total IR luminosity from intermediate redshift m luminosities gives a more accurate result than the useof LIRLtemplates. with logLIRLis lowerthan that of local galaxiesof comparable IR luminosity. The IR ux ratios are poorly de terminedforthe Llowbinbecauseofthelargeuncertainties in the averageand m IR luminosities which are par tiallyduetotheintrinsicscatteramongthesamplegalaxie sin theLlow bin including earlytype galaxies and latetype galaxiesin thequiescentstar formationphase. We compared our average SEDs with the IR SED model templates from Lagacheet al. Chary Elbaz and Dale Helou . The three sets of templates were empiricallycalibratedtorepresentlocalstarformingga laxies spanning a wide range in the IR ux ratio ff. Dale Helous IR SED templates are characterized by the ux ra tioff. We use the equationfromChapmanet al. to parameterize the IR luminosity m as a func tion offf.The templates from Lagacheetal. and CharyElbaz were characterized by the IR lu minosity. We extended each set of SED templates by linear interpolation in logarithmic space to a grid of SEDs with the characteristicIRluminosityrangingfromtoLwith a resolution of .dex. The observed IR SED of each subset wascomparedtothe threesets oftemplates Nlterssummationdisplay ibracketleftBiggLobsifscaleLtempiz. ibracketrightBigg whereLobsiLtempiandiaretheobservedandtemplatelumi nositiesandtheiruncertaintyinlterirespectivelyan dfscale is a normalization constant. Here only and m bandswere used to t templates i.e. Nlters.Ltempis cal The total IR luminosity dened in Chapman et al. is bet ween and min good agreement with the adopted oneDale et al. se e also Takeuchi et al. b.culatedbyconvolvingtheredshiftedSEDtemplateto z. withtheor mltertransmissionfunction. fscaleis chosen to minimize the for each template. The top plot in Figure shows the tting results. The templates with a nor malizationconstant fscaleofunityarechosenasthebesttlu minositymatchtemplatesandthosewithaminimum asthe bestt dust temperature match or SED shape match tem plates. The bestt templates are compared to the observed SEDsin thebottomplotofFigure. As shown in Figure the local SED templates track the observed SEDs reasonably well in particular for the L medium bin which contains the majority of intense star forming galaxies. As the total IR luminosity is dominated by emission in the restframe wavelength range between andmtheestimatesofthetotalIRluminositywithtem plates from dierent models give similar results. In contrast is a measure of the shape agreement between a template and an observed SED. It is worth noting that the estimate of total IR luminosity based on the three measurements at and m is not sensitive to the shapes of the IR SED templates. Both the bestt luminosity match and the best t dusttemperaturematchtheSEDtemplatesandsuggestatotal IR m luminosity of log LIRL. . . for the three average SEDs respectively. Generally speak ing the shape or dust temperature of the average IR SEDs of starforming galaxies at z. i.e. the Lhigh bin and Lmedium bin are better tted by the local SED templates of characteristic IR luminosity LIRLthan those of LIRL. This holds for all three sets of templates. It conrms that the typical starforming galaxies at z. are likelytohaverelativelycolderdustemissionthanlocalga lax ieswithcomparableIRluminosity. Zhenget al. ..The extrapolationfrom therestframe m to thetotal IRluminosity Local IR SED templates are often used to estimate the to tal IR luminosities from single midIR band luminosities fo r distantstarforminggalaxies. WiththeaveragedIRSEDsde termined in the three MIPS bands we are able to better con strain the estimates of the IR luminosities. We compared the estimateswiththosetransformedfromsingle mluminosi tiesusinglocalSEDtemplates. By linearly integrating between the average and m luminositiesinlogarithmspaceforthestarforming galaxies at z. we estimated the restframe m luminosities. Uncertainties are calculated from the combi nation of the uncertainties in the three bands. The total IR the restframe m luminosity is derived from the three dust temperaturematch templates to each observed IR SED the and m. We combine the scatter be tween the templates and the uncertainty in determining the dust temperaturematchtemplates in which the uncertaint ies of the and m luminositiesare countedas the un certainty for the total IR luminosity. The results are liste d in Table . For comparison we use the NASA IPAC Extra galactic database NED to collect a sample of local star forminggalaxies z.withobservationsatand m byIRAS at m by ISO and at least in one band longerthan m. The m luminosityand the total IRluminosityarecalculatedasabove. Whenobservationsdo not reach m a modest lessorsimilar of the IR luminosity extrapolationis employedusingthelocalSED templates. Figure shows the extrapolationsbolometric corrections from the restframe m to the m luminosity left plot and to the total IR luminosity right plot as function s of the IR ux ratio ff. The local starforming galax iesexhibitasignicantscatterChary Elbazseeals o Daleet al. such scatter is typically adoptedas the sy s tematic uncertainty of templatebased estimates of total I R luminosity from restframe midIR luminosity. The z. starforming galaxies distribute within the scatter of the lo cal starforming galaxies. Again there is a tendency for th e z. galaxies to cluster towards the colder templates sug gesting that use of spiral galaxy templates for extrapolati on oftotalIRluminosityfromintermediateredshift muxes gives a more accurate result than the use of starburst LIRG templates. ..Dust extinction A universal relation between SFR and dust extinction is suggested by several studies at z Hopkinset al. AdelbergerSteidelBell Takeuchiet al.a Zhengetal. Buat etal. althoughsee Reddyetal. for a dissenting view at z. With a measured esti mateofthetotalIRluminosityfromtheand mlu minositiesweexploretherelationshipbetweenSFRanddus t extinction at z. comparing it to that at z. The dust extinction is described by the IR to UV ratio LIRLUV. The UV luminosity i.e. the integrated luminosity between res t frame is estimated from linear interpolation o f theFUVNUVU andBband luminosities for z. galaxysubsetsshowninFiguresand. FollowingBell etal. we derivedtheSFR fromtheIRandUV luminosities withtheformula SFRMyr.LIR.LUV. . . . log SFR MO yr ....log LIR LUV IrrPecSpiralESMMO Galaxies at z. Local relation Martin et al. Fig.. The ratio IR UV ux i.e. the fractional dust obscuration as a function of SFR. Solid circles show the three subsets of galaxies with M Mand .z. sorted by the m luminosity. Other symbols show three morphology subsets of starforming f Jy galaxies in redshift slice .z.. The dashed line shows the local relation Martin et al. b. assuming a stellar population with a constant SFR for Myr and a Kroupa initial mass function. Figure showsthe relationshipbetweendust obscurationandSFR for z. galaxies compared to the local relation derivedfrom IRAS and GALEX data with a scatter at .dex level Martinet al. b Xuet al. Buatet al. . As shown in Figure the z. galaxies distribute perfectly alongthelocalrelationoveroneorderofmagnitude. .DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION We selected a sample of galaxies in the redshift slice .z. of known morphology from HST imag ing and another sample of masslimited MM galaxies in the redshift slice .z. to study the IR SEDsatthatredshift. Wedividedoursamplegalaxiesintodi f ferent masslimited morphology and m luminosity bins. For each bin we determined the average luminosities in bands from the FUV to the FIR by summing the individual detectionsandaddinginthestackeduxfromnondetection s. Carefuleortsweretakeninstackingthenoiseandconfusion limited and m images. Empirical corrections deter minedfrom the m image were introducedto accountfor theclusteringeectsonthe stackresults. The average luminosities in three MIPS bands determine the IR SED from the restframe to m. Our principal result is that the average IR SED shape of z. intensely starforminggalaxieswithIRluminosities Lissimi lartoreasonablycoollocaltemplatesi.e.templateso fnor malspiralgalaxies. ThedustSEDseemstodependonmor phologicaltype for starforminggalaxiesat z.. Thishas the immediateand importantimplicationthat the use ofloca l templates to extrapolate total IR luminosity from observed frame m data is a wellposed problem at least on aver age. Interestingly galaxies with cool dust temperature s in thelocalUniversealltendtohaveIRluminosities lessorsimilar.L i.e. distant intensely starforminggalaxiestend to be ch aracInfraredSEDsof z.StarFormingGalaxies . . . . . log f f ....log f f LhighLlow . . . . Rest Wavelength mL LO Llow Lhigh Fig..SameasFig.. The lledcircles showthetwosubsetsofgalaxies in the redshift slice .z. split by m luminosity surface density. The inner panel shows the average SEDs of the two subsets. The Lhigh bin and theLlow bin data points are located separated along the dust temperature sequenceoflocalstarforminggalaxies indi cating thattheL high bin is characterized by a hotter dust emission than the Llow bin. This isclearly seen from the di erence between their IR SEDs. terized by colder dust emission than their local counterpar ts ofcomparableIRluminosity. Previous studies have found evidence for a somewhat cooler dust SED at .z. than for local galaxies of a comparable luminosity e.g. Popeet al. Sajina etal . at .z.. These studies were selected in rest framememissionandtheauthorssuspectedthattheir overall tendency towards colder IR SEDs was in part due to that longwavelengthselection. Our sample is selected o n restframem emissioni.e. bywarm dust yet we nd a colder average SED at a given luminosity than is found locally. This tends to support the interpretation that the o set which we and others have found towards colder tempera turesatagivenluminosityareatleastinpartarealdi erence. We suggest that this tendency toward colder dust tempera turereects a dierencein dust andstar formationgeometry whereaslocalLIRGstendtobeinteractingsystemswithrela tivelycompactveryintensestar formationandofcomparabl e massese.g.Wanget al. .lessorsimilarzlessorsimilarLIRGstendtobe diskdominated relatively undisturbed galaxies Zhenge tal. Bell et al. Melbourneet al. . We suggest that these disk galaxies host widespread intense star forma tion like star formation in local spirals but scaled up lea d ing to relatively cold dust temperatures. This is consisten t with what Chanialetal. found the scatter in the LIRTdustrelation for starforming galaxies is largely in duced by the size dispersion of the starforming regions an d the IR luminosity surface density IRTdustrelation is morefundamental than the the LIRTdustrelation. We examined the IR ux ratio ffindicator of dust temperature as a function of the IR luminosity surface density for z. starforming galaxies. By taking galaxy size i.e. halfli ght radius derived from HST imaging H auleret al. as a proxy of the size of starforming regions in a galaxy and m luminosity as a proxy of total IR luminosity we split a sample of mdetected galaxies in the redshift slice .z. into two bins in the m luminosity surface densityL. TheaverageSEDs forthetwo subsetsof galax ieswereconstructedinthesamewayasdescribedin .and shown in the inner panel of Figure . The total IR luminos ity is estimated as log LIRL. and . for the L high bin and theLlow bin respectively. As shown in Fig ure the two subpopulationsare distributedalongthe dus t temperature sequence of local starforming galaxies. Gala x iesin theLhighbinonaverageshowhotterdust emission thanthoseintheLlowbinsuggestingthattheIRluminos ity surface density plays an essential role in shaping IR SED Chanialet al.. Finally with UV luminosities derived from GALEX data and IR luminosities derived from three band MIPS data we determined a quite precise relationship between the dust ob scuration and SFR for z.. Our results show an excel lent agreement between the SFRdust obscuration relation a t z. with that at the present day indicating that no signif icant evolution occurs since that redshift. Our measuremen ts give the mean values of SFR and dust obscuration. The ac tual scatter in dust obscurationcan spreadby dexfor in dividual galaxies of given SFRMartinet al. b Xuet al. Buat et al. . Reddyet al. claimed that the dust obscuration for starforming galaxies is systematica lly smaller at z than the present day. Their sample is dom inated by restframe UVselected galaxies. This may lead to a potential selection biasagainst objectswith highIR UV ra tio see Buat etal. for the comparisonbetween UV and FIR selected samples of local galaxies and a similar discus sion. Therefore studies based on unbiased samples of high redshift galaxies will help to answer the question whether the SFRdust obscuration relation still holds at z. This will addimportantconstraintstoourunderstandingofgala xy evolutioninvolvingstarformationandmetallicityenrich ment Zhenget al.. We are grateful to Daniel A. Dale and Kirsten K. Knud sen for helpful discussions. E. F. B. was supported by the Emmy Noether Programme of the Deutsche Forschungsge meinschaft. Support for E. L. F.s work was provided by NASA through the Spitzer Space Telescope Fellowship Pro gram. This work was in part supported by contract fromJPLCaltech tothe Universityof Arizona. Thisresearch has made use of the NASA IPAC Extragalactic Database NED which is operated by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory California Institute of Technology under contract with th e NationalAeronauticsandSpaceAdministration. 