.................................................................................................................. Chapter Overview of the research..................................................................... Chapter Non Fourier description of laser matter interaction......................... Chapter Time delayed processes in biophysics............................................ ... Chapter Time delayed processes in archaeology............................................ . Introduction A key quantity in the description of the transport phenomena is the relaxation time of the corresponding dissipative processes. In the time dealyed description of the transport phenomena we argue that the generalized t r qG current of the partons for example electrons or migrated peoples fulfills the relaticent ... tqt q t q I. Following formula I. and conservation laws for transport processes the master equation for transport phenomena can be obtained t r f Dtt r f tt r f GG G I. In this paper the master equation I. will be used to the description of the time delayed phenomena in physics biology and archaeology. Chapter Overview of the research . Hyperbolic versus parabolic In the description of the ev olution of any physical sy stem it is mandatory to evaluate as accurately as possibl e the order of magnitude of different characteristic time scales since their relationship with the time scale of observation t he time during which we assume our description of the system to be valid w ill determine al ong with the relevant equations the evolution pattern. Ta ke a forced damped harmonic oscillator and consider its motion on a time scale much larger than both the damping time and the period of the forced oscillation. Then what one observes is just a harmonic motion. Had we observed the system on a time scal e of the order of or smaller than the damping time the transient regime would have become apparent. This is rather general and of a very re levant interest when dealing with dissipative systems. It is our purpose here by means of examples and arguments rela ted to a wide class of phenomena to emphasize the convenience of resorting to hyperbolic theories when dissipative processes either outside the st eadystate regime or when the observation time is of the order or shorte r than some characteristic time of the system are under consideration. Furthermore as it will be mentioned below tr ansient phenomena may affect the way in which the system leaves the equilibrium thereby affecting the future of the system even for time scales much larger than the relaxation time. Parabolic theories of diss ipative phenomena have long and a venerable history and proved very useful especially in the steady state regime .. They exhibit however some undesirable features such as acausality s ee e.g. . . that prompted the formulation of hyperbolic theories of dissipati on to get rid of them. This was achieved at the price of extending the set of field variables by including the dissipative fluxes heat current nonequilibrium stress es and so on at the same footing as the classical ones energy densities equilibrium pressures etc thereby givi ng rise to a set of more physically satisfactory as they much better conform with experiments but involved theories from the mathematical point of view. These theories have the additional advantage of being backed by statistical fluctuation theo ry kinetic theory of gases Grads moment approximati on information theory a nd correlated random walks at least in the version of Jou et al. .. A key quantity in these theories is the relaxation time of the corresponding dissipative process. Th is positivedefinite quantity has a distinct physical meaning namely the time taken by the system to return spontaneously to the steady state whether of thermodynamic equilibrium or not after it has been suddenly removed from it. It is however connected to the mean collision time tc of the particles responsible for the dissipative process It is therefore appropriate to interpret the relaxation time as the time taken by the corre sponding dissipative fl ow to relax to its steady value. Thus it is we ll known that the classical Fourier law for heat current . T q G . with K the heat conductivity of the fluid lead s to a parabolic equation for temperature diffusion equation pCTtT . where and C p are diffusivity density and speci fic heat at constant pressure respectively which do es not forecast propagation of perturbations along characteristic causal lightcones That is to say perturbations propagate with infinite speed. This noncausal behavior is easily visualized by taking a look at the thermal conduction in an infinite one dimensional medium. Assuming that the temperature of the line is zero for t and putting a heat source at x x when t the temperature profile for t is given by tx x tT exp . implying that for t T x x and for T t t . In other words the presence of a heat source at x is instantaneously felt by all observers on the line no matter how far away from x they happen to be. The origin of this behavior can be traced to the parabolic character of Fouriers law which implies that the heat flow starts vanishes simultaneously with the appearance disappearance of a temperature gradient. Although is very small for phono nelectron and phonon phonon interaction at room temperature and seconds respectively neglecting it is the source of difficulties a nd in some cases a bad approximation as for example in superfluid Heli um and degenerate stars wh ere thermal conduction is dominated by electrons see . for further examples. In order to overcome this problem Cattane o and independently Vernotte by using the relaxation time approximation to Boltzm ann equation for a simple gas derived a generalization of Fouriers law namely . T qtq GG . This expression known as Catt aneoVernottes equation leads to a hyperbolic equation for the temperature Heaviside equation wh ich describes the prop agation of thermal signals with a finite speed v . This diverges only if the unphysical assumption of setting to zero is made. It is worth mentioni ng that a simple random walk an alysis of transport processes naturally leads to H eaviside equation not to the diff usion equation see e.g. .. Again the latter is obtain ed only if one ne glects the second derivative term. It is instructive to write . in the equivalent integral form t dt t x Tt tq exp G . which is a particular case of the more general expression t dt t x T t t Q q G . The physical meaning of the kernel Q t t becomes obvious by observing that for T q t t Q G Fourier . for TtTQ constant wave motion i.e. Q describes the thermal memory of the mate rial by assigning di fferent weights to temperature gradients at different moments in the past. The Fourier law corresponds to a zeromemory material the only relevant temperature gradient is the last one i.e. the one simultaneous with the appearance of q. By contrast the infinite memory case with Q constant leads to an undamped wave. Somewhere in the middle is the CattaneoVernotte equation for which all temperature gradients contribute to q but their relevance goes down as we move to the past. From these comments it should be clear that different classes of dissipative systems may be described by different ke rnels. The one corr esponding to . being suitable for the description of a restrict ed subclass of phenomena. Obviously when studying transient regimes i.e. the evolution from a steadystate situation to a new one cannot be neglected. In fact leaving aside that parabolic theories are necessarily nonca usal it is obvious that when ever the time scale of the problem under consider ation becomes of the order of or smaller than the relaxation time the latter cannot be ignored. It is comm on sense what is at stake here neglecting the relaxation time amounts in this situation to di sregarding the whole problem under consideration. Accord ing to a basic assumption underlyi ng the disposal of hyperbolic dissipative theories dissipative processes with relaxation times comparable to the characteristic time of the system are out of the hydrodynamic regime. However the concept of hydrodynamic regime involves the ratio between the mean free path of fluid particles and the characteristic length of the system. When th is ratio is lower that unity the fluid is within th e hydrodynamic regime. Wh en it is larger than unity the regime becomes Knudsens. In the latter case the fluid is no longer a continuum and even hyperbolic theories cease to be realiable. Therefore that assumption can be valid onl y if the particles making up the fluid are the same ones that transport the heat. Ho wever this is never the case. Specifically for a neutron star r is of the order of the scattering time between electrons which carry the heat but this fact is not an obstacle no matter how large the mean free path of these electrons may be to consider the neut ron star as formed by a Fermi fluid of degenerate neutrons. The same is true for the second sound in superfluid Helium and solids and for almost any ordinary fluid. In brief the hydrodynamic regime refers to fluid particles that not necessarily and as a matter of fact almost never transport the heat. Therefore large relaxation times large mean free paths of particles involved in heat transport does not imply a departur e from the hydrodynamic regime but it is usually overlooked. However even in the case that the particles making up th e fluid are responsible of the dissipative process it is not always valid to take for granted that and tc are of the same order or what comes to the sa me that the dimensionless quantity csL is negligible in all instances here cs stands for the adiabatic sp eed of sound in the fluid under consideration and L the characteristic length of the system. That assumption would be right if were always comparable to tc and L always large but there are however important situations in which tc and L small although still large enough to justify a macroscopic description. For tiny semiconductor pieces of about cm in size used in common electronic devices submitted to high electric fields the a bove dimensionless combination with sec c s cmsec . can easily be of the order of unity. In ultras ound propagation as we ll as lightscattering experiments in gases and neutronscattering in liquids the relevant length is no longer the system size but the wave length A which is usually much smaller than L Because of this hyperbolic theories may bear some importance in the study of nanoparticles and quantum dots. Likewise m polymeric fluids relaxation times are related to the internal configurational degrees of freedom and so much longer than tc in fact they are in the range of the minutes and c a cmsec thereby . In the degenerate core of aged stars the thermal relaxation time can be as high as l second .. Assuming the radius of the co re of about times the solar radius one has again. Fully ionized plasmas exhibit a collisionless regime Vlasov regime for which the parabolic hydrodynamics predicts a plasm on dispersion relation at va riance with the microscopic results the latter agree however with the hyperbolic hydrodynami c approach. Think for instance of some syrup fluid flowing under a imposed shear stress and imagine that the shear is suddenly switched off. This liquid will come to a ha lt only after a much longer time than the collision time between its co nstituent particles has elapsed .. . High Energy Density Systems The increase in light intensity available in the laboratory over the previous years has been astounding. Laser peak power has climbed from gigawatts to petawatts in this time span and accessible focused intensity has increased by at least seven orders of magnitude. Such a dramatic increase in light brightness has accessed an entirely new set of phenomena. High repetition rate table top lasers can routinely produce intensity in excess of IWcm and intensities of up to Wcm are possible with the latest petawatt class systems. Lightmatter interac tions with single atoms are strongly nonpe rturbative and electron energies are relativistic. The intrinsi c energy density of these focused pulses is very high exceeding a gigajoule per cm. The interactions of such intense light with matter lead to dramatic effects such as high temperature plasma creation bright Xray pulse generation fusion plasma production relativistic particle ac celeration and highly charged ion production .. Such exotic lasermatter interactions have led to an interesting set of applications in high field science and high energy de nsity physics HED phy sics. These applications span basic science and extend into unexpected new ar eas such as fusion en ergy development and astrophysics. In this paper some of these new applications w ill be reviewed. The topics covered here do not represent a comprehensive lis t of applications made possible with high intensity short pulse lasers but they do give a flavor of the diverse areas affected by the latest laser technology. Most of the applications discussed here are based on recent experiments using lasers with peak power of TW. Many important leaps in laser technology have driven the rapid advances in HED and high field science over the last years. The enabling advancement for this technological progress was the inven tion of chirped pulse amplification CPA lasers. The physics accessible with this class of lasers is quite extreme. The science applications made possible with these extr emes can be simply classified into two categories. First by temporally compressing the pulses and focusing to spots of a few wavelengths in diameter these lasers concentrate energy in a very small volume. A multiTW laser focused to a few microns has an intrinsic energy density of over Jcm. This corresponds to about l keV of energy per atom in a material at solid density. As a result quite high temperatures can be obtained. Such energy density corresponds to pressure in excess of l Gbar. Many applicat ions of ultraintense lasers stem from the ability to concentrate energy to high energy density which can lead to quite extreme states of matter. The second class of applications arises from the high field strengths associated with a very intense laser pulse. At an intensity of over Wcm an intensity quite easily achievable with modern table top terawatt lasers the electric field of the laser exceeds ten atomic units over Vcm. Consequently the strong fi eld rapidly ionizes the atoms and molecules during a few laser cycles. At intensity approaching Wcm the current state of the art with petawatt class lasers the electric field is comparable to the field felt by a Kshell electron in mid Z el ements such as argon. The magnetic field is nearly T. An electron quivering in such a strong electric field will be accelerated to many MeV of energy in a single optical cycle. Such charged particles will experience a very strong forward directed force re sulting from the Lorentz force .. High peak power femtosecond lasers are unique in their ability to concentrate energy in a small volume. A dramatic consequence of this concentration of energy is the ability to create matter at high temperature and pressure. Matter with temperature and density near the center of dense stars can be created in the laboratory with the latest high intensity lasers. For example solid density matter can be heated to temperature of over C keV. Under these conditions the particle pres sure inside the sample is over billion atmospheres far higher than any other pre ssure found naturally on or in the earth and approaches pressures created in nuclear weapons and inertial confinement fusion implosions. Study of the properties of matter at these ex treme conditions namely solid density or higher in the temperature range of eV is crucial to unders tanding many diverse phenomenon such as the structure of planet ary and stellar interiors or how controlled nuclear fusion implosions inertial confinemen t fusion or ICF evolve. Yet despite the wide technological and astrophysical applications a true complete understanding of matter in this regime is not in hand. A large obstacle is posed by the fact that theoretical models of this kind of matter are difficult to formulate. While the atoms in these warm and hot dense plasmas are strongly ionized th e very strong coupling of the plasma and continuum lowering in the plasma dramatical ly complicates traditional plasma models which depend on two body collisio n kinetics. Even the questio n of whether electrons in this state are free or bound is not as cl ear cut as it is in a diffuse plasma. .. High Energy Density Heat Tran sport and Special Relativity Theory In the interaction of laser beam with thin solid target fast ion beams and electrons are generated with large density. When the en ergy of laser beam is highly enough the ion and electron velocities are relativistic and tr ansport of thermal energy must be described by relativistic equations. In the paper . we develop the desc ription of the heat transport in Minkowski spacetime. In the contex t special relativity theory we investigate the Fourier equation and hyperbolic diffusion equation. We calculate the speeds of the heat diffusion in Fourier approximation and show that for high energy laser beam the heat diffusion exceeds the light velocity. We show th at this results breaks the causality of the thermal phenomena in Minkowski spacetime. Th e same phenomena we describe in the framework of hyperbolic heat diffusion equatio n and show that in that case speed of diffusion is always smaller than light velocity. We may use the concept that the speed of light in vacuo provides an upper limit on the speed with which a signal can travel between two events to establish whether or not any two events could be connected. In the inte rest of simplicity we shall work with one space dimension x x and the time dimension xo ct of the Minkowski spacetime. Let us consider events a nd their Minkowski interval s satisfies the relationship . x t c s Without loss of generality we take Event to be at x t . Then Event can be only related to Event if it is possible for a signal traveling at the speed of light to connect them. Event is at x c t its relationship to Event depends on whether s or . We may summarize these three possibilities as follows Case A timelike interval t c xA or . Event can be related to Event s events and can be in causal relation. Case B lightlike interval t c xB or . Event can only be related to s Event by a light signal. Case C spacelike interval t c xA or . Event cannot be related to s Event for in that case c . Now let us consider the case C in more details. At first sight it seems that in case C we can find out the reference frame in which two Events c and c always fulfils the relations . but it is not true. For lest us choose the inertial frame U in which . In reference frame U which is moving with speed V relative to U where c ct t c ct t c cc c x xt t cc V . Speed V c for c cc c x xt t c . Let us calculate in the reference frame U c ct t c c c c c cc cc c c c c c t t x xx xt t cVt t x xcV cVt t . For the greater V we will have . It means that for the spacelike intervals the sign of depends on the speed V i.e. causality relation for spacelike events is not valid. c ct t c ct t .. Fourier diffusion equation and special relativity theory In paper . the speed of the diffusion signals was calculated D . where mD . and is the angular frequency of the laser pulses. Considering formula . and . one obtains mcc . and c for . mc From formula . we conclude that for the Fourier diffusion equation is in contradiction with special relativity th eory and breaks the causality in transport phenomena. mc In monograph . the hyperbolic model of the heat transport phenomena was formulated. It was shown that the description of the ultrashort thermal energy transport needs the hyperbolic diffusion equation one dimension transport xTDtT tT . In the equation . c m is the relaxation time m mass of the heat carrier is the coupling constant and c is the light speed in vacuum Txt is the temperature field and mD . In paper . the speed of the thermal propagation v was calculated m m m . Considering that c m formula . can be written as c mm mcm m . For mc mc . one obtains from formula . m . Formally formula . is the same as formula . but considering inequality . we obtain c cm . and causality is not broken. For mc mc . we obtain from formula . c. c . Considering formulae . and . we conclude that th e hyperbolic diffusion equation . describes the thermal phenom ena in accordance with special relativity theory and causality is not broken in dependently of laser beam energy. When the amplitude of the laser beam a pproaches the critical electric field of quantum electrodynamics Schwinger field . the vacuum becomes polarized and electron positron pairs are created in vacuum .. On a distance equal to the Compton length c me C the work of critical field on an el ectron is equal to the electron rest mass energy i.e. . The dimensionless parameter c mec m eEe C Sch c mE e EE e Sch . becomes equal to unity for electromagne tic wave intensity of the order of . cmW e C ec m rcI . where re is the classical electron radius .. For such ultra high intensities the effects of nonlinear quantum electrodynamics plays a key role laser beams excite virtual electron positron pairs. As a result the vacuum acquires a finite electric and magnetic susceptibility which lead to the scattering of light by light. The cross section for the photon photon interact ion is given by c mr ee . for and reaches its maximum for .. c me max cmc me Considering formulae . and . we conclude that linear hyperbolic diffusion equation is valid only for the laser intensities WcmI. For high intensities the nonlinear hyperbolic diffusion equation must be formulated and solved. Table .. Hierarchical structure of the thermal excitation Interaction mc Electromagnetic . for pions Strong for nucleons Quark Quark D.H. Perkins Introduction to high energy physics Addison Wesley USA References to Chapter . A. L. Fetter and J. D. Walecka Theoretical mechanics of particles and continua MacGraw Hill NY . . D. Jou J. Casas Vzquez G. Lebon Extended irreversible thermodynamics Springer . . M. Kozlowski J. MarciakKozlow ska From quark to bulk matter Hadronic Press . . E. Zauderer Partial Differential Equations of Applied Mathematics nd edition Willey NY . . R. C. Davidson et al. Frontiers for discovery in high energy density physics NSCT USA . . M . P e l c M . K o z l o w s k i J . M a r c i a k K o z l o w s k a L a s e r s i n E n g i n e e r i n g . . J. Marciak Kozlowska M. Kozlowski Lasers in Engineering in print . M. Kozlowski J. Marciak Kozl owska Thermal processes using attosecond laser pulses Springer . . J. Schwinger Phys. Rev. . . F. Pegararo et al. Physics Letter A . Chapter NonFourier description of laser matter interaction . Fundamentals of laser pul ses interaction with matter In this paragraph we will study the ultrashort thermal processes in the framework of the hyperbolic diffusion equation. When an ultrafast thermal pulse e.g. femtosecond pulse interacts with a metal surface the excited electrons become the main carriers of the thermal energy. For a femtosecond thermal pulse the duration of the pul se is of the same order as the electron relaxation time. In this case the hyperbolicit y of the thermal ener gy transfer plays an important role .. Radiation deposition of energy in materials is a fundamental phenomenon to laser processing. It converts radiati on energy into materials inte rnal energy which initiates many thermal phenomena such as heat pulse propagation melting and evaporation. The operation of many laser techniqu es requires an accurate under standing and control of the energy deposition and transport processe s. Recently radiation deposition and the subsequent energy transport in metals have been investigated with picosecond and femtosecond resolutions. Results show that during highpower a nd shortpulse laser heating free electrons can be heated to an effective temperature much higher than the lattice temperature which in turn leads to both a much faster en ergy propagation process and a much smaller latticetemperature rise than those predicted from the conventional radiation heating model. Corkum et al. . found that th is electronlattice nonequilibrium heating mechanism can si gnificantly increase the resistance of molybdenum and copper mirrors to thermal da mage during highpower laser irradiation when the laser pulse duration is shorter than one nanosecond. Clemens et al. . studied thermal transport in multilayer metals duri ng picosecond laser heating. The measured temperature response in the first ps was foun d to be different from predictions of the conventional Fourier model. Due to the relatively low temporal resolution of the experiment ps however it is difficult to determine whether this difference is the result of nonequilibrium laser heating or is due to other heat conduction mechanisms such as nonFourier heat conduction or refl ection and refraction of thermal waves at interfaces. Heat is conducted in solids through electrons and phonons. In metals electrons dominate the heat conduction while in insulators and se miconductors phonons are the major heat carriers. Table . lists important features of the electrons and phonons. Table .. General Feat ures of Heat Carriers Free Electron Phonon Generation ionization or ex citation lattice vibration Propagation media vacuum or media media only Statistics Fermion Boson Dispersion E qm E Eq Velocity ms The traditional thermal science or macroscale heat transfer employs phenomenological laws such as Fouriers law without considering the detailed motion of the heat carriers. Decreasing dimensions however have brought an increasing need for understanding the heat transfer processes from the microscopic point of view of the heat carriers. The response of the electron and phonon gases to the external perturbation initiated by laser irradiation can be described with the help of a memory function of the system. To that aim let us consider the generalized Fourier law . . tdt t T t t K t q where qt is the density of a thermal energy flux Tt is the temperature of electrons and Kt t is a memory function for thermal pro cesses. The density of thermal energy flux satisfies the following e quation of heat conduction t Vdt t T t t Kct Tt . where is the density of charge carriers and cV is the specific heat of electrons in a constant volume. We introduce the following equation for the memory function describing the Fermi gas of charge carriers . lim t t t K t t K t . In this case the electron has a very short memory due to thermal disturbances of the state of equilibrium. Combining Eqs. . and . we obtain . T Kct TtV . Equation . has the form of the parabolic equation for heat c onduction PHC. Using this analogy Eq. . may be transformed as follows . T D t TtT . where the heat diffusion coefficient DT is defined as follows . VTcKD . From Eq. . we obtain the relation be tween the memory function and the diffusion coefficient . lim t t t c D t t K tV T . In the case when the electron gas shows a l ong memory due to thermal disturbances one obtains for memory function K t t K . When Eq. . is substituted to the Eq. . we obtain t vdt t TcKTt . Differentiating both sides of Eq. . with respect to t we obtain . TcK tT V . Equation . is the hyperbolic wave equa tion describing therma l wave propagation in a charge carrier gas in a me tal film. Using a wellknown fo rm of the wave equation . TtT v . and comparing Eqs. . and . we obtain the following form for the memory function . v c t t KV v finite v . As the third case intermediate memory will be considered exp t t Kt t K . where is the relaxation time of thermal processes. Combining Eqs. . and . we obtain TK tTc tTcV V . and .V Tc D K . Thus finally . TD tT tTT . Equation . is the hyperbolic equation for heat conduction HHC in which the electron gas is treated as a Ferm ion gas. The diffusion coefficient DT can be written in the form . F T v D . where vF is the Fermi velocity for the electro n gas in a semiconductor. Applying Eq. . we can transform the hyperbolic e quation for heat conduction Eq.. as follows . T vtT tT F . Let us denote the velocity of disturba nce propagation in the electron gas as s . Fv s . Using the definition of s Eq. . may be written in the form . TtT s tT s . For the electron gas treated as the Fermi gas the velocity of sound propagation is described by the equation . S F s Fmmpv F Fmv p . where m is the mass of a free noninteracting electron and m is the effective electron mass. Constant F S represents the magnitude of carriercarrier interaction in the Fermi gas. In the case of a ve ry weak interaction m m and F S so according to Eq. . . FF S v mmvv . To sum up we can make a statement that for the case of weak electronelectron interaction sound velocity F S v v and this velocity is equal to the velocity of thermal disturbance propagation s. From this we conclude that the hyperbolic equation for heat conduction Eq. . is identical as the equation for second sound propagation in the electron gas . TtT v tT vS S . Using the definition expressed by Eq. . for the heat diffusion coefficient Eq. . may be written in the form . TtT D tT vT S . The mathematical analysis of Eq. . leads to the following conclusions . In the case when is finite Eq. . transforms into the parabolic equation for heat diffusion S S v v .TtT DT . . In the case when Sv is finite Eq. . transforms into the wave equation . T tT vS . Equation . describes propaga tion of the thermal wave in the electron gas. From the point of view of theoretical physics condition vS violates the special theory of relativity. From this theory we know that there is a limited velocity of interaction propagation and this velocity v lim c where c is the velocity of light in a vacuum. Multiplying both sides of Eq. . by c we obtain T ctT Dc tT vc T S . Denoting vS c Eq. . may be written in the form T ctT D tT T . where TD . On the basis of the above consid erations we conclude that the heat conduction equation which satisfies the special theory of relativity acquires the form of the partial hyperbolic Eq. .. Th e rejection of the first component in Eq. . violates the special theory of relativity. In onedimensional flow of h eat in metals the hyperbolic heat transport equation is given by .. xTDtT tT T F T v D . where denotes the relaxation time D T is the diffusion coefficient and T is the temperature. Introducing the non dimensional spatial coordinate x z where denotes the reduced mean free path Eq. . can be written in the form zT tT va tT v . where vv a . In Eq. . v denotes the velocity of heat propagation . v D. In the paper by C. De WittMo rette and See Kit Fong . the pathintegral solution of Eq. . was obtained. It was shown that for the initial condition of the form an arbitrary function z z T ttt z T . the general solution of the Eq. . has the form ate t z t z t z T t atz z d ea . t a Ittt a I In Eq. . Ix and I x denote the modified Bessel function of zero and first order respectively. Let us consider the propagation of the initial thermal wave with velocity v i.e. sin t v z t v z . In that case the integral in . can be computed analytically cos sin t v z t z t z and the integrals on the righth and side of . can be done explicitly . we obtain sin cos sin z t w t wwae t z Fat . a v and sin cosh sinh z t w t wwae t z Fat a v . where w v a and w a v. In order to clarify the physical meaning of the solutions given by formulas . and . we observe that v v and w and w can be written as v w v v w v . where denotes the pulsation of the initial ther mal wave. From formula . it can be concluded that we can define the ne w effective thermal wave velocities v and v . Considering formulas . and . we obs erve that the thermal wave with velocity v is very quickly attenuated in time. It occurs that when the scatterings of the heat carriers diminish the thermal wave. It is interesting to observe that in the lim it of a very short relaxation time i.e. when v because for Eq. . is the F ourier parabolic equation. It can be concluded that for the Fourier equation is relevant equation for the description of the thermal phenomena in metals. For the scatterings are slower than in the preceding case and attenuati on of the thermal wave is weaker. In that case and v is always finite v v v . For i.e. for very rare scatterings v v and Eq. . is a nearly free thermal wave equation. For finite the v v and thermal wave propagates in the medium with smaller velocity than the veloci ty of the initial thermal wave. Considering the formula . one can define the change of the phase of the initial thermal wave i.e. tan wa . We conclude that the scatterings produce the change of the phase of the initial thermal wave. For very rare scatterings tan . .. Highorder wave equation for thermal transport phenomena In papers . . the generalized ther mal wave equation with the third order time derivative was considered. For heat transport initiated by ultrashort laser pulses when t one obtains the second order PDE for quantum thermal phenomena mD TDmVT DtT tT . Equation . can be written as . T DtT tTTDmV . For V equation . can be written as . T D tT tT . From dimensional analysis we can write new equation . T D Tt t t . Let us write Eq. . in the form tT tT tTT . where D . Equation . yields the char acteristic polynomial equation p sjk s s s k . Equation . was investigat ed for oscillating transport phenomena by P.M. Ruiz. It was shown in paper . that one of the solution of Eq. . is nonphysical i.e. increasing with time. In onedimensional case one obtains from Eq. . xT tT tT tT . The secondorder hyperbolic equation xT tT tT . was discussed in monograph .. Below we analyze the thirdorder wave equation xTDtT . in the case of thermal processe s induced by attosecond laser pulses vD c v . and equation . can be rewritten as tT xT . vD mv . We seek a solution of equa tion . of the form . . t kx iAe t x T Substituting equation . to Eq. . one obtains . . i ik This shows that equation . is the solution of the thirdorder PDE i.e. Eq. . is the thirdorder wave equation if vD mv iik . where v is the speed of propagation of thermal en ergy .. Substituting Eq. . to Eq. . one obtains xtxixtxi e Be e Ae t x T . where is mean free path. The second term in Eq. . tends to infinity for x and is to be omitted. The final solution of Eq. . has the form txix Ae e t x T . and describes the strongly damped thermal wave. It is interesting to observe that for elec tromagnetic interaction the thirdorder time derivative dtx d also describes the damping of the electron motion due to the self interaction of the charges .. In this paragraph the thir dorder wave equation for thermal processes was derived and solved. It was shown that the additiona l thirdorder derivative term describes the strongly damped wave. For x where is the mean free path the influence of third order derivative term tT can be omitted when describing the thermal phenomena induced by ultrashort laser pulses. .. Quantum heat transport equation Dynamical processes are commonly inve stigated using laser pumpprobe experiments with a pump pulse exciting the sy stem of interest and a second probe pulse tracking is temporal evolution. As the time resolution attainable in such experiments depends on the temporal definition of the laser pulse pulse compression to the attosecond domain is a recent promising development. After the standards of time and space were defined the laws of classical physics relating such parameters as distance time velocity temperature are assumed to be independent of accuracy with which these pa rameters can be measured. It should be noted that this assumption doe s not enter explicitly into the formulation of classical physics. It implies that together with the assumption of existe nce of an object and really independently of any measurements in clas sical physics it was tacitly assumed that there was a possibility of an unlimited in crease in accuracy of measurements. Bearing in mind the atomicity of time i.e. considering the smallest time period the Planck time the above statement is obviously not true. Atto second laser pulses we are at the limit of laser time resolution. With attosecond laser pulses belong to a new Nano World where size becomes comparable to atomic dimensions where tr ansport phenomena follow different laws from that in the macro world. This firs t stage of miniaturization from m to m is over and the new one from m to m just beginning. The Nano World is a quantum world with all the predicable a nd nonpredicable yet features. In this paragraph we develop and solve the quantum relativis tic heat transport equation for nanoscale transport phenomena where external forces exist .. In paragraph . we developed the new hype rbolic heat transport equation which generalizes the Fourier heat transport equa tion for the rapid thermal processes. The hyperbolic heat transport equation HHT for the fermionic system has be written in the form . TtT v tT vF F . where T denotes the temperature the relaxation time for the thermal disturbance of the fermionic system and vF is the Fermi velocity. In what follows we develop the new formulation of the HHT considering the details of the two fermionic systems electron gas in metals and the nucleon gas. For the electron gas in metals the Fermi energy has the form ee FmnE . where n denotes the density and m e electron mass. Considering that mea nB . and aB Bohr radius one obtains B c m ma mnEe ee F . where c light velocity and is the finestructure constant for electromagnetic interaction. For the Fermi momentum pF we have c mape Be F . and for Fermi velocity vF . cmpv eF e F . Formula . gives the theoretical background for the result presented in paragraph .. Considering formula . equa tion HHT can be written as . TtT c tT c . As seen from . the HHT equation is a relativistic equation since it takes into account the finite velocity of light. For the nucleon gas Fermi energy equals mrEN F . where m denotes the nucleon mass and r which describes the range of strong interaction is given by c mr . wherein m is the pion mass. From formula . one obtains for the nucleon Fermi energy . mcmmEN F . In analogy to the Eq. . form ula . can be written as . mc EsN F where . mm s is the finestructure constant for strong interactions. Analogously we obtain the nucleon Fermi momentum mcrpse F . and the nucleon Fermi velocity cmpFvsN F . and HHT for nucleon gas can be written as . TtT c tT cs . In the following the procedure for the discretization of temperature t r TG in hot fermion gas will be developed. First of all we introduce the reduced de Broglie wavelength N hN Be h ee B mvv m c vc v sN he h . and the mean free paths e and N . e e hev .N N hNv In view of formulas . and . we obtain the HHC for electron and nucleon gases e eee B e he BTm tT tT v . . N NN B N hNB Tm tT tT v . Equations . and . are the hyperbolic partial differential equations which are the master equations for heat propagation in Fermi electron and nucleon gases. In the following we will study the quantum limit of h eat transport in the fermionic systems. We define the quantum heat transport limit as follows . e Be .N BN In that case Eqs. . and . have the form e ee e eTm tT tT . NN N NTm tT tT . where e h ee v m .N hN v m . Equations . and . define the master equation for qu antum heat transport QHT. Having the relaxation times e and N one can define the pulsations and e hN h e e h . N N h or e h e e hv m N h N hv m i.e. . cmv mcmv m s N hN he e h ee h . The formulas . define the Plan ckEinstein relation for heat quanta and e hEN hE . N h NN hN he h ee he h v m Ev m E . The heat quantum with energy hE can be named the heaton in complete analogy to the phonon magnon roton etc. For e N Eqs. . and . are the Fourier equations with quantum diffusion coefficients De and DN e ee T DtT ee mD . N NN T DtT .mDN . For finite e and N for t e t N Eqs. . and . can be written as ee e hTtT v . . NN N hTtT v . Equations . and . are the wave equations for quantum heat transport QHT. For t one obtains the Fourier equa tions . and .. In what follows the dimensionless form of the QHT will be used. Introducing the reduced time t and reduced length x t t hvxx . one obtains for QHT ee e TtT tT . . NN N TtT tT . and for QFT ee TtT . .NN TtT . .. Proca thermal equation It is quite interesting that the Proca type equation can be obtained for thermal phenomena. In the following starting with the hyperbolic heat diffusion equation the Proca equation for thermal processes will be developed and solved .. In paper . the relativistic hyperbo lic transport equation was developed . TtT m tT v . In equation . v is the velocity of heat waves m is the mass of heat carrier and the Lorentz factor cv . As was shown in paper . the heat energy heaton temperature Th can be defined as follows . . v m Th Considering that v the thermal wave velocity equals . v c . where is the coupling constant for the interactions which generate the thermal wave and . for electromagnetic and strong forces respectively. The heaton temperature is equal to . c mTh . Based on equation . one concludes that the heaton temperature is a linear function of the mass m of the heat carrier. It is interesting to observe that the proportionality of Th and the heat carrier mass m was observed for the first time in ultrahigh energy heavy ion reactions measured at CERN .. In paper . it was shown that the temperature of pions kaons and protons produced in PbPb SS reactions are proportional to the mass of par ticles. Recently at Rutherford Appleton Laboratory RAL the VULCAN LASER was used to produce the elementary particles electrons and pions .. In this chapter the forced relativistic he at transport equation will be studied and solved. In the case of the forced heat transpor t the master equation is of the form . . T TVm tT m tT v . The relativistic generaliz ation of equation . is quite obvious . T TVm tT m tT v . It is worthwhile noting that in order to obtain a nonrelativist ic equation we put . When the external force is present Fxt the forced damped heat transport is obtained instead of equation . in one dimensional case . t x FxTTVm tT m tT v . The hyperbolic relativistic quantum heat transp ort equation . de scribes the forced motion of heat carriers which undergo scattering tT m term and are influenced by the potential term TVmo . Equation . is the Proca thermal equation and can be written as . .Vm m TTFt vt x x t . We seek the solution of equation . in the form t x u e t x Tt . where mv is the relaxation time. After substituting equation . in equation . we obtain a new equation tqux t e Fx t . and mv Vmq . m m . In free space i.e. when Fxt equation . reduces to . qux t which is essentially the free Proca equation. The Proca equation describes the interaction of the laser pulse with the matter. As was shown in paper . the quantization of the temperature field leads to the heatons quanta of thermal energy with a mass hhvm . where is the relaxation time and vh is the finite velocity for heat propagation. For vh i.e. for c mo . it can be concluded that in nonrelativistic approximation c infinite the Proca equation is the diffusion equation for massless photons and heatons. .. Solution of the Proca thermal equation For the initial Cauchy condition x g x u x f x ut . the solution of the Proca equation has the form for q . . t t v x t t v xtvt x vt xvt x vt x d dt x t t v q J t Gvd x t vx t v q Jfvt qd x t v q J gvvt x f vt x ft x u . where t x F e Gt . When q solution of Proca equation has the form . t t v x t t v xtvt x vt xvt x vt x d dt x t t v q I t Gvd x t vx t v q Ifvt qd x t v q I gvvt x f vt x ft x u . When q equation . is th e forced thermal equation . t x Gxu tu v . On the other hand one can say that equatio n . is distortionless hyperbolic equation. The condition q can be rewritten as V . The equation . is the analogous to the Heisenberg uncertainty relation. Considering equation . equation . can be written as . hhT VTV . It can be stated that distortionle ss waves can be generated only if Th V. For Th V i.e. when the Heisenberg rule is broken the shape of the thermal waves is changed. In this chapter we developed the relativistic thermal transport equation for an attosecond laser pulse interaction with matter. It is shown that the equation obtained is the Proca equation well known in relativistic electrodynamics for massive photons. As the heatons are massive particles th e analogy is well founded. Considering that for an attosecond laser pulse the damped term in Eq. . tends to the transport phenomena are well described by the Proca equation. References to Chapter . M. Kozlowski J. MarciakKozlowska Thermal Processes Using Attosecond Laser Pulses Springer . . P. B. Corkum et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. . . B. M. Clemens et al. Phys. Rev. B . . C. De WittMorette S. Kit Fong Phys. Rev. Lett . . M. Pelc M. Koz owski J. MarciakKoz owska Lasers in Engineering . . M. Pelc M. Koz owski J. MarciakKoz owska Lasers in Engineering . . P.M. Ruiz A Technique for Simulating the Vibrations of Strings with a Digital Computer PhD Thesis Univ. Ill. Urbana . . R.P. Feynman The Feynman Lecture on Physics vol. PWN . . M. Pelc J. MarciakKoz owska M. Koz owski Lasers in Engineering . . I. G. Bearden et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. . . K. W. D. Ledingham and P. A. Norreys Contemporary Physics . Chapter Time delayed processes in biophysics .. Clusters and aggregates of atoms Clusters and aggregates of atoms in the nanometer range currently called nanoparticles are systems intermediate in several respects between simple molecules and bulk materials and have been the subject of intensive work. In this paragraph we investigate the ther mal relaxation phenomen a in nanoparticles microtubules within the frame of the quantum he at transport equation. In reference . the thermal inertia of materials heated with laser pulses faster than the characteristic relaxation time was investigated. It was shown that in the case of the ultrashort laser pulses it was necessary to use the hyperbolic heat conduction HHC. For microtubules the diameters are of the order of the de Brogl ie wave length. In that case quantum heat transport must be used . to describe the transport phenomena Tm tT tT . where T denotes the temperature of the heat carrier and m denotes its mass and is the relaxation time. The relaxation time is defined as . hmv . where vh is the thermal pulse propagation rate c vh . In equation . is a coupling constant for th e electromagnetic interaction and cdenotes the speed of light in vacuum. Both parameters and v c e h characterizes completely the thermal energy transport on the atomic scale and can be termed atomic relaxation time and atomic heat diffusivity. Both and v h contain constants of Nature c. Moreover on an atomic scale there is no shorter time period than and smaller veloc ity than that build from of constants in Nature. Consequently one can call and v h the elementary relaxation time and elementary diffusivity which characterizes heat transport in th e elementary building block of matter the atom. In the following starting with elementary and vh we shall describe thermal relaxation processes in microtubules which consist of the N components molecules each with elementary and v h. With this in view we use the PauliHeisenberg inequality . N p r . where r denotes the characteristic dimens ion of the nanoparticle and p is the momentum of the energy carriers. The Pauli Heisenberg inequality expresses the basic property of the N fermionic system. In fact compared to the standard Heisenberg inequality p r . we observe that in this case the presence of the large number of identical fermions forces the system either to become spatially more extended for a fixed typical momentum dispension or to increase its typical mome ntum dispension for a fixed typical spatial extension. We could also say that for a fermi onic system in its ground state the average energy per particle increases w ith the density of the system. An illustrative means of interpreting the Pau liHeisenberg inequality is to compare Eq. . with Eq. . and to think of the qua ntity on the right hand side of it as the effective fermionic Planck constant . N Nf . We could also say that antisymmetrization which typifies fermionic amplitudes amplifies those quantum effects which are aff ected by the Heisenberg inequality. Based on equation . we can recalculate the relaxation time equation . and the thermal speed vh equation . for a nanopa rticle consisting of N fermions N Nf . and obtain h ff h v N Nev . . N v mf hf f . The number N particles in a nanoparticle sphere with radius r can be calculated using the equation we assume that density of a na noparticle does not differ too much from that of the bulk material AZ rN . and for non spherical shapes with semi axes a b c AZ abcN . where is the density of the nanoparticle A is the Avogardo number is the molecular mass of theparticles in grams and Z is the number of valence electrons. Using equations . and . we can calculate the de Broglie wave length and mean free path for nanoparticles f B f mfp B f thf f B Nmv . mfpf f thfN v th emfp . where B and B mfp denote the de Broglie wave length and the mean free path for heat carriers in nanoparticles e.g. microtubules. .. Quantum transp ort in microtubules In paper . we develop the Klein Gordon thermal equation for microtubules. Microtubules are essential to cell functions. In neurons micr otubules help and regulate synaptic activity responsible for learning and cognitive function. Whereas microtubules have traditionally been considered to be pur ely structural elements recent evidence has revealed that mechanical chemical and el ectrical signaling and a communication function also exist as a result of the microtubule inte raction with membrane structures by linking proteins ions and voltage fi elds respectively. The characteristic dimensions of the microtubules a crystalline cyli nder nm internal diameter are of the order of the de Broglie length for electrons in atoms. When the characteristic length of the structure is of the order of the de Broglie wave length th en the signaling phenomena must be described by the quantum transport theory. n order to describe quantum transport phenomena in microtubules it is necessary to use equation . with the relaxation time described as follows Tm tT tT . E mv . where the relaxation time is the decoherence time i.e. the time before the wave function collapses when the transition classical quantum phenomena is considered. In the following we consider the time for atomic and multiatomic phenomena. As was shown in Chapter for atomic phenomena s . and when we consider multiatomic transport phenomena with N equal number of aggregates involved the equation is . a a NN . The Penrose Hameroff Orchestrated Obje ctive Reduction Model OrchOR . proposes that quantum superposition computat ion occurs in nanotubu le automata within brain neurons and glia. Tubulin subunits with in microtubules act as qubits switching between states on a nanosec ond scale governed by London forces in hydrophobic pockets. These oscillations are tuned and orch estrated by microtubule associated proteins MAPs providing a feedback loop between the biological system and the quantum state. These qubits interact computationally by no nlocal quantum entanglement according to the Schr dinger equation with preconscious proce ssing continuing until the threshold for objective reduction OR is reached T E . At that instant collapse occurs triggering a moment of awareness or a c onscious event an event that determines particular configurations of Planck scal e experiential geometry and corresponding classical states of nanotubules automata that re gulate synaptic and ot her neural functions. A sequence of such events could provide a fo rward flow of subjective time and stream of consciousness. Quantum states in nanotubules may link to those in nanotubules in other neurons and glia by tunne ling through gap functions Table .. The decoherence relaxation time Event T ms E N number of aggregates ms Buddhist moment of awareness nucleons Coherent Hz oscillations EEG alpha rhytm to Hz Libets sensory threshold permitting extension of the quantum state through significant volumes of the brain. Based on the size and extension of Orch OR events which correlate with a subjective or neurophysiological description of conscious events can be calculated. In Table . the calculated T PenroseHameroff and equation . are presented .. T E .. Heisenberg uncertainty prin ciple for thermal phenomena in microtubules We shall now develop the generalized quantum heat transport equation for microtubules which also includes the potential term. Thus we are able to use the anal ogy of the Schrodinger and quantum heat transport equations. If we consider for the moment the parabolic heat transport equation with the second derivative term omitted .Tm tT . If the real time T it t Eq. . has the form of a free Schr dinger equation . m ti . The complete Schr dinger equation has the form Vm ti . where V denotes the potential energy. When we go back to real time the new parabolic heat transport is obtained T it t .TVTm tT . Equation . describes the quantum heat transport for t . For heat transport initiated by ultrashort laser pulses when t one obtains the generalized quantum hyperbolic heat transport equation . TVTm tT tT . Considering that mv Eq. . can be written as follows . T TVm tT m tT v . Equation . describes the heat flow when apart from the temperature gradient the potential energy V is present. In the following we consider onedi mensional heat transfer phenomena i.e . xTTVm tT m tT v . We seek a solution in the form . t x u e t x Tt . for the quantum heat transport equation . After substitution of Eq. . into Eq. . one obtains . t x quxu tu v . where mv Vmq . In the following we consider a constant potential energy V V. The general solution of Eq. . for the Ca uchy boundary conditions x Ftt x ux f x u t . has the form . vt x vt xdz z y xvvt x f vt x ft x u . where vVm mvbt v x zt v x z Jz btf t v x zvbJvz t xvb . and Jz denotes the Bessel function of the firs t kind. Considering equations . . . the solution of Eq. . desc ribes the propagation of the distorted thermal quantum waves with characteristic lines x vt. We can define the distortionless thermal wave as the wave which preser ves the shape in the potential energy V field. The condition for conserving the shape can be expressed as mv Vmq . When Eq. . holds Eq. . has the form . xuvtt x u . Equation . is the quantum wave equatio n with the solution for Cauchy boundary conditions . . vt x vt xdz z Fvvt x f vt x ft x u . It is interesting to observe th at condition . has an anal og in classical theory of the electrical transmission line. In the context of the transmission of an electromagnetic field the condition q describes the Heaviside distor tionless line. Eq. . the distortionless condition can be written as V . We can conclude that in the presence of the potential energy V one can observe the undisturbed quantum thermal wave in microtubules only when the Heisenberg uncertainty relation for thermal processes . is fulfilled. The generalized quantum heat transport equation GQHT . leads to generalized Schrdinger equation for microtubules. After the substitution in Eq. . one obtains the ge neralized Schrdi nger equation GSE T it t . tVm ti . Considering that is the finestructure constant for electromagnetic interactions Eq . . can be written as c m mv . t c mVm ti . One can conclude that for a time period the description of quantum phenomena needs some revision. On the other hand for in GSE the second derivative term can be omitted and as a result the Schr dinger equation SE is obtained i.e. s c m t t Vm ti . It is interesting to observe that GSE was discussed also in the context of the sub quantal phenomena. In conclusion a study of the interactions of the attosecond laser pu lses with matter can shed light on the applicability of the SE in a study of ultrashort subquantal phenomena. The structure of Eq. . depe nds on the sign of the parameter q. For quantum heat transport phenomena with electrons as the heat carriers the parameter q is a function of the potential barrier height V and velocity v. The initial Cauchy condition x gtx ux f x u . and the solution of the Eq. . has the form . d x t vx t v q Ift q vd x t v q I gvvt x f vt x ft x u vt x vt xvt x vt x . When q Eq. . is the Klein Gordon equation KG which is well known from applications in elementary particle and nuclear physics. For the initial Cauchy condition . the solution of the KG equation can be written as . d x t vx t v q Jft q vd x t v q J gvvt x f vt x ft x u vt x vt xvt x vt x . Both solutions . and . exhibit the domains of dependence and influence on the modified KleinGordon and KleinGordon equation. These domains which characterize the maximum speed at whic h a thermal disturbance can travel are determined by the principal terms of the given equation i.e. the second derivative terms and do not depend on th e lower order terms. It ca n be concluded that these equations and the wa ve equation for m have identical domains of dependence and influence. References to Chapter . Kozlowski M. and MarciakKozlowska J. From Quarks to Bulk Matter Hadronic Press . . J. Marciak Kozlowska M. Kozlowski M. Pelc Lasers in Engineering . . Hameroff S. R. and Tuszy ski J. . Cons cious events as orchestr ated spacetime selections Journal of Consciousness Studies . Chapter Time delayed processes in archeology .. Introduction The origins of European agriculture are normally sought in the Near East. The earliest indicators of agriculture in the fo rm of cultivation of cereals and pulses are rearing of animals come from Zagros footh ills. Their age BC corresponds to the cool dry climatic period followed by a rapid increase in rainfall at the beginning of the Holocene BC. During the early stages of agricultural development Preceramic Neolithic BC the rapid increase in th e number of sites is noticeable in both the foothills and the surrounding plains accompanied by the appearance of large settlements with complicated masonry structures a nd fortifications e.g. Jericho. At a later stage the core area of early agri cultural settlements shifts to the north to the eastern highlands and inner depressions of Asia Minor. Th e most outstanding case of early agricultural development in this area is Catal Hyk a Neolith ic town on the Konya Plain BC. The earliest sites with developed agricu ltural economies in Europe dated BC are found in the intermontane depre ssions of Greece Thessaly Beotia and Pelloponesse. Genetic features of the cultigens and the genera l character of the material culture leave no doubt to their Near Eastern origins. Significantly the early Neolithic sites in the Marmara Sea are of a more r ecent age BC being culturally distinct from the Early Neolithic in Greece. This implies that the Neolithic communities could penetrate the Balkan Peninsula from Western Asia by means of navigation. The Neolithic spread further plausibly via the Strouma axis in the northeast and the Vardar Morava axis in the north. The en suing development saw a rapid growth of Neolithic settlements in the depressions of northern Thrace the Lower and Middle Danube catchment basin BC. The next stage in the Neolithic development saw the emergence of new sites on the Tisza Plain in BC .. The new sites later spread over the vast areas of the loess plains of Central Europe mostly along the Danube Rhine Mainz and Vi stula axes. This spre ad occurred within the range of BC within the most probable age of BC .. Judging from the number of sites the populatio n in the Near East started increasing BC. Ammerman and Cavalli Sforza . focused on measuring the rate of spread of early farming in Europe and derived the rate of spread v kmyear on average in Europe. The Danube and Rhine valleys the propagation paths had an increased propagation speed as did the Me diterranean west .. The speeds of propagation of the wave front v in these areas are as follows v kmyear on average in Europe v kmyear for the Danube Rhine valleys v kmyear for Mediterranean regions Interpretations of these observations are usually based on the reaction diffusion equation of population dynamics . .. Fo rt and Mndez . . discuss the front propagation rate resulting from the generalization of Fisher model but their results are restricted to the homogenous system. The aim of this work is to formulate and develop a model for the spread of incipient farming in Europe taking into account the en vironmental influences on the migration processes. .. The model Fick diffusion equation is a special case of the parabolic transport equation in which speed of perturbation propagati on is infinite. Parabolic transport equation has been applied to the spread of advantageous gene s . dispersion of biological population . epidemic models .. However if perturbation propa gates at finite speed Fick law does not hold .. This unphysical feature can be avoided by making use of h yperbolic transport equation .. The hyperbolic propagation equation HPE has been very recently applied to the spread of epidemics . forest fire m odels . and chemical system .. An interesting application of the Fick law to the migration in neolithic Europe was presented in .. Such a model as was presented in . provides a consistent explanation for the origin of Indo European languages . an d also finds remarkable support from the observed gene frequencies .. In this paper we develop the model fo r the population migration following the method presented in .. Let nxt stands for population density measured in number of families per square kilometer where x is Cartesian coordinate and t is time. We assume that a well defined time scale between two successive migration steps exists. The migrated population interacts with environment. This in teraction we will model by potential V. in that case the hyperbolic migration equation can be written as . t x G xpD pDEVp tp tp kk . In equation . D is the migration diffusion coefficient pk and E k denote the momentum and kinetic energy of migration and Gxt is the population growth. Equation . is th e Heaviside equation for populatio n density .. It is the hyperbolic equation which describes the migration with memory. Memory term tp changes the type of the equation. For equation . is the parabolic Fick equation for population migration. We seek solution of the Eq.. in the form t x u e t x pt . After substituting of Eq. . to Eq.. one obtains . teDt x G E DVp Dt x uxu tu vk . For V i.e. for attractive potential equa tion . is the modified Klein Gordon equation i.e. so called telegrapher equation. For V we have two possibilities kVpED . and kVpED . In the case described by the inequality . equation . is the Klein Gordon equation and for . Eq. . is the telegrapher equation. In the following we will consider the V i.e. attractive po tential in that case equation . can be written as . t x F t x quxu tu v . kk E Dp V Dq q . and De t x Gt x Ft . Let us consider th e initial condition xx g x u x f t x ut . for the equation .. Then the general solution of Eq. . can be written as . . t v x t v xvqtvt x vt xvqvt x vt xvq d d x t v vI Fvd x t vx t v If tqvd x t v I gvvt x f vt x ft x u . Considering Eq. . and Eq. . the solution of Eq. . can be written as t x u e t x pt . where the uxt is described by formula .. As can be seen from formula . the general solution of Eq. . is the sum of the wave motion described by the term vt x f vt x f and the lag term. In conclusion one can say that the migration can be de scribed as the damped wave motion which for is going to diffusion of the population. t 