 It is widely accepted that solar ares imply the release of la rge amounts of energy which go mainly in the acceleration of particles el ectrons and ions. The interaction of these particles with the medium plasma a nd magnetic eld produces radiation by very dierent mechanisms which is ob served at Earth in a wide range of wavelengths. Of particular interest are el ectrons moving along the magnetic lines and producing gyrosynchrotron emi ssion observed at microwaves and shorter wavelengths. Gyrosynchrotron em ission of mildly relativistic electrons is distributed in a broad continuum at high harmonics of the fundamental frequency BeBmec where eis the electron charge Bthe magnetic eld strength methe electron mass at rest and cthe speed of light. The maximum emission is centred around B with the electron Lorentz factor Dulk . Taking B G indicative values ofare between and for a GHz photon. Observationally Kosu gi et al. found that the highest correlation between centimet ric wavelengths and hard Xrays HXR happens between GHz and keV that is e lectrons with energies keV. Therefore radio observations at shorter waveleng ths oer new insights to understand processes that involve high energy electrons during solar ares where current HXR detector technology d oes not provide enough sensitivity andor signal to noise ratios to observe weak ares. Since the only submillimeter instrument dedicated to solar observation is the Solar Submillimeter Telescope SST see e.g. Kaufmann et a l. oper ating at and GHz. From the theoretical arguments give n above MeV electrons should produce the synchrotron emission obse rved with SST. In this work we report the multiwavelength observations of the impulsive and gradual phases of an Xclass are that occurred on October . In the following section we describe the instruments and data anal ysis. In Section we analyse the impulsive phase of the are while in Section we do the same for the gradual phase. Finally we give our concluding remar ks. Observations and principal characteristics of the event The SST Kaufmann et al. is a radome enclosed . m sing le dish an tenna with room temperature receivers in a focal array at GHz and at GHz with ms time resolution. On October SST wa s tracking AR N W with its beam . In Figure we sketch the po sition of SST beams with crosses on a A EUV image of EIT Delaboudiniere et al. the size of the crosses is equal to the HPBW. While beam s and GHz are round beam GHz has an elliptical shape with minor Fig. . A A EIT image of the aring area at UT. North is up and east to left. The labelled crosses represent the SST beams and are GHz receivers while is a GHz receiver. Only beams and det ected the burst. and major axes in the directions shown in the gure. Because o f the high at mospheric attenuation only two beams observed this event o ne at GHz beam and one at GHz beam . Beams GHz and GHz are not shown in the gure. Since only two beams observed the e vent we can not use the multibeam technique Costa et al. to locat e the centroid of emission. Assuming that the radio source is coincident with the EUV bri ght loop see Fig. we correct the observed antenna temperature at a nd GHz for the misalignment. During calibration the antenna tempe ratures are also corrected for atmospheric attenuation. Finally the corre cted antenna tem peratures are converted to ux densities F using the well known formula F kbTaAe where kbis the Boltzmann constant Tathe corrected antenna temperature and Aethe eective area of the antenna. We estimate a un certainty for the whole process. Data at microwave frequencies with second time resolution were obtained by the Radio Solar Telescope Network RSTN Guidice et al. . Figure shows the time proles of the event at dierent wavelengths. At . GHz we see that the burst starts at UT as a small enhancemen t that evolves into the impulsive phase with a maximum ux density around s.f.u. at UT. The increasing phase is characterized by short emissions that can eeeW m GOES A Flux Density s.f.u.. GHz Flux Density s.f.u. GHz Flux Density s.f.u. GHz UT x x x W m s GOES . keV Time Derivative Fig. . Time proles at selected wavelengths. GOES data have seconds time res olution radio data are integrated to second. be attributed to dierent particle injections. The decreas ing phase is smooth with no bursts reaching the minimum value close to the pre are level at UT. Afterward a post burst increase is observed un til approximately UT. This gradual phase has also some bursting episodes characteristic of particle injections. Although the GHz time prole is in general smoother than t hat at . GHz most of the features observed at . GHz are also presen t with smaller amplitude at GHz. The starting time of the burst at GH z coincides with that at . GHz UT but the peak time is delay ed by seconds UT at GHz. The gradual phase is also pr esent with sudden changes probably of instrumental origin. The G Hz time prole UTWavelet Scale s GHz . GHz Goes . keV Time Derivative Fig. . Wavelet transform of the ux density at . and GH z and GOES time derivative represented in a D graph. Contour levels are W ms GOES time derivative s.f.u. GHz and s.f.u. . GHz. during the rising phase is closer to the . GHz emission tha n to the GHz is in general delayed in seconds. The decaying phase is more extended than in the other frequencies and shows the presence of longe r features some of these features could have an atmospheric origin and do no t allow us to clearly recognize the gradual phase. Unfortunately no HXR data are available for this event. Ins tead we have used the time derivative of GOES . keV soft Xray SXR c hannel with seconds temporal resolution to compare with the radio ux d ensity. The sensitivity of GOES is better than W m taking this value as the ux uncertainty the ux time derivative has a mean uncertai nty better than W ms W ms. The time derivative of GOES channel bottom curve in Fig. mimics very well the radio t ime proles during the rising phase and is coincident in time but has two clear maxima the rst peaking in coincidence with the . GHz emission. W e will show later that the second GOES time derivative peak still during the r ising phase is also present at the other frequencies but during their deca ying phase. Finally the decaying phase in this curve lasts longer than the others and has some bursting episodes. We use the wavelet transform see e.g. Daubechies to c ompare the time proles. Wavelets are very useful to discriminate the d ierent time scales in a time series. We have integrated our data to the lowest tim e resolu tion namely seconds and applied the wavelet transform imp lemented by Torrence and Compo based on a Morlet mother wavelet wi th wavenum ber . In Figure each contour represents a structure resolv ed by the transform with a characteristic scale in the ordinates occurring at th e time in the ab scissas. We note that for each frequency the minimum contour level plotted is much greater than the signal uncertainty. We have overplo tted the density ux at . GHz dark thick curve GHz light thick curve and the time derivative of the GOES ux black thin curve. The dashed cur ve represents theconeofinuence of the transformation i.e. where the boundaries do not aect the result. We observe that near peak time UT th ere are three groups of structures with scales around seconds. The rst one a little before UT is observed at the three frequencies with no appreciable delay between them. The second one just after UT is present a lso at the three frequencies. The last one UT is observed at . GHz and GOES time derivative. At GHz this structure appears only aft er UT. Other structures with longer duration are also observed for the seconds scale around UT and around UT. In general the wavelet transforms are similar for the dierent frequencies inclu ding the coincidence in time of the characteristic features at the dierent scale s. Time proles do not reect this in a more evident way because the relative imp ortance of the pulses are dierent. The impulsive phase Figure left panel depicts the time evolution of the . and . GHz emissions at the top together with the temporal evolution o f the optically thick spectral index at the bottom. This index is determined from the ux densities at . . . and . GHz. The index is lowe r than all along the impulsive phase. The spectral index of the optical ly thick gyrosyn chrotron spectrum originated in a homogeneous source is bet ween . and . Dulk independently of the electron index. Therefo re our result is an indication of the presence of an inhomogeneous source. The ms integrated time evolution of the ux density at a nd GHz during the impulsive phase is shown in the right panel of Figu re above. The bottom of this panel corresponds to the temporal evolution o f the optically thin spectral index deduced from these ux densities the on ly two frequencies that are optically thin in our data. During the central part o f the impulsive phase between the dashed lines in the right panel of the Fig. the index is close to constant with gradual transitions at the beginnin g and end. Therefore Flux Density s.f.u.. GHz. GHz UT.... . Flux Density s.f.u. GHz GHz UT.... . Fig. . Left panel s time proles of . and . GHz ux de nsities from RSTN observations above and temporal evolution of the optical ly thick spectral index obtained from the . . . and . GHz ux densitie s below. Right panel ms time proles of and GHz ux densities dedu ced from SST observations above and temporal evolution of the optical ly thin spectral index obtained from the and GHz ux densities ratios below . we can characterize the peak time with only one electron popu lation. Using Dulks formula Dulk we can estimate the electron en ergy index as . The low spectral resolution of our radio data does not allow u s to obtain a unique theoretical t of the spectrum i.e. dierent sets of parameters mag netic eld strength viewing angle source size lower and h igher cuto ener gies etc. give similar results for the optically thin regi on while the optically thick region is never well tted as expected when an inhomog eneous source is present. The GHz gradual phase The gradual phase is observed very clearly at GHz Fig. . At lower fre quencies after the main burst new bursting episodes of gyr oemission origin UTFlux density s.f.u. A. GHz flux s.f.u. GHz flux Freefree model Fig. . The GHz gradual phase. After the burst UT a gradual increase of the ux is observed at GHz lasting until UT. During the gradual phase some bursting episodes are seen. In contrast after UT the microwave ux here represented by the shifted . GHz das hed line shows a second burst composed of many pulses. The most intense one is also observed at GHz. Along interval Awe integrate the ux density at the dierent frequencies to obtain one spectrum Fig. . The continuous thick line re presents the expected emission of a thermal bremsstrahlung. are seen. Figure shows the . GHz ux density arbitraril y shifted by s.f.u. to clarify the plot the late bursting episodes are e vident in this gure. The strongest . GHz feature is also observed at GHz ar row in Fig. . Variations in the atmospheric attenuation andor emission are relatively more intense at GHz than at GHz and thus they modulate the b ackground making the freefree emission dicult to observe. To test the thermal bremsstrahlung hypothesis we have model led the observed emission as an isothermal homogeneous bremsstrahlung sour ce. We integrate Frequency GHzFlux density s.f.u. Fig. . Spectrum of the ux density during the interval UT. The solid curve represents the expected emission of an isothermal bre msstrahlung source. Fig. . A soft Xray image taken by SXI of the aring area just b efore the maximum of the are. The contours represent the emission levels of th e thermal source. The circle corresponds to the source of our isothermal bremsstr ahlung model. the ux densities at dierent frequencies in the minute int erval shown in Figure with a label A to obtain the gradual spectrum. We ha ve not tried to subtract the contribution from other emission mechanism s like gyrosyn chrotron therefore we choose an interval that does not sho w strong gyroemis sion. To determine the size of the source we have used an image from the Solar Xray Imager GOESSXI Hill et al. Pizzo et al. Fig. con sidering the emitting area above of the maximum which yi elds a source size of the order of . The emission measure and temperatur e of the source are determined using the Chiantibased model with coronal a bundances and the response of GOES detectors. We t the expected emission t o the observed data having as free parameters the source size and the sourc e depth and we include a multiplicative factor . The time prole of the gradual emission at GHz must be tted simultaneously. We have obtained the be st t with a source size of . cm depth and .. Figures and show the results. The temporal evolution of the model is remarkab ly similar to the gradual phase of the GHz emission. Moreover the modelle d spectrum fol lows the observed one. The homogeneous and isothermal thermal bremsstrahlung ux density F is F kBT cexp H where is the absorption coecient His the depth of the source and the source solid angle while Trepresents the source temperature and is our multiplicative factor. The absorption coecient can be approximated by Dulk .N med Tcm withNmedthe thermal plasma density. In the optically thick regime w here H Eq. tends to FkBT c. Therefore if we want to explain the observed spectrum the p roduct T of the microwave source must be a factor . larger. In the optic ally thin regime Eq. turns out to be FkBT c.N medH T .kB cRparenleftBiggEM TparenrightBigg where EMN medVis the emission measure Vthe volume of the source andRis the Sun Earth distance. From Eq. we can infer that the pro d uctEM Tmust be a factor . larger i.e. either the EM is larger or the temperature is lower or both things are true. Therefore co nsidering the opti cally thick and optically thin regimes we conclude that the source is neither homogeneous nor isothermal. Similar results for the gradua l phase of other events were obtained by L uthi et al. at submillimete r wavelengths and by Chertok et al. and Sui et al. in microwaves. Conclusions In this work we have presented a multiwavelength analysis of a GOES X class are including radio data SXR and EUV images. Radio observ ations cover the range between . and GHz but we have no observations between . and GHz. At GHz the event has two distinct phases imp ulsive and gradual. At microwave frequencies there is a second impuls ive phase whose emission at submillimeter frequencies is barely observed. We nd that the optically thin spectral index is almost constant during the central part of the impulsive phase afterwards there is a ha rdening. A transi tion to freefree emission that in the optically thin regim e has an almost null index can explain the change of . The gradual phase observed at GHz can be explained by brem sstrahlung from a thermal source. The similarity of the temporal evolut ion of the emission coming from an isothermal bremsstrahlung source with EMandTdeduced from SXR data and the ux density at GHz sustains this hy pothesis. Nonetheless either the EMmust be higher or Tmust be smaller to t the observations. On the contrary to t to the microwave observ ations the prod uctT must be larger. Therefore the thermal source cannot be hom ogeneous. The use of submillimeter frequencies in the analysis of burs t phenomena opens new windows to understand the earlier stages of a are at high energies which are hard to observe with HXR detectors and the late stages of the are where the thermal bremsstrahlung is normally optically thin and m ore intense than at microwave frequencies. Acknowledgements .This research was partially supported by the Brazilian age ncy FAPESP contract and by the Argentinean grants UBACyT X UBA PICT ANPCyT PIPs and CONICET . G.D.C. is a fellow of ANPCyT. We acknowledge the GOESSXI tea m for SXI data and the SoHOEIT consortia for EUV data. SOHO is a proje ct of inter national cooperation of ESA and NASA. The RSTN data originat e at several United States Air Force monitoring stations. 