 A hundred years ago the life of one of the most prolic and inu ential of XIX centurys physicists came to a tragic end. It has long been discussed by historians and biographers the many reasons why Ludwig Eduard Boltzmann decided to put a n end to his life while on vacation in Duino . After all notwithstanding th e many controversies which ragedabout hisworkandthemanyattacks hehadtoharness hi scareer hadbeenabrilliant one at the age of already a full professor in Graz by the en d of his life he had been appointed tochairs of many distinguished universities an d once even refused changing his family name to the noble von Boltzmann with the argument th at if our rather middle class name has been enough for my ancestors it should remain so for my children and grandchildren . While gathering the admiration of many of his contemp oraries some did not fully understand his contributions to Statistical M echanics whose foundations he helped establish along with R. Clausius J.C. Maxwell and pa rticularly J.W. Gibbs whom he greatly admired . Highly regarded in his native Austri a he travelled extensively overseas. His very spirited account of a trip to the United St ates also shows a man of keen observational powers and agreat sense of humor . Here I would like to discuss another facet of Boltzmann name ly that of an advocate of Technology in the mirror of Aviation. Asit happens with many other giants of science the contributions theyaremostly remembered for usually overs hadow other fundamental ones. S lvio R.Dahmen SoforinstancefewrememberHeinrichHertzsElasticityTh eoryaseminaltheoreticalcon tribution still extensively employed by practicioners in t he eld . Isaac Newtons Hy drodynamics paleincomparison tohisMechanics Gravitati on andOptics forreasons I will discuss shortly since they are directly related to the theme of this essay. By the same token Boltzmanns experimental contributions to Eletromagnetism have only received the attention they deserved in the last few years . Th ese works albeit important are seen as secondary to his contributions to Statistical Me chanics. They do however show us a different picture of Boltzmann that of a rstrate expe rimental physicist tuned to the technological challenges of his times. Myanalysis isbasedonthelecture UberLuftschiffahrthedeliveredduring theth Annual Meeting of the German Society of Natural Scientists a nd Physicians held in Vi enna in . Boltzmann was well aware of his stature in t he scientic community and seized the opportunity presented by such aprivileged ve nue to passionately defend the brooding eldofAeronautics. Thisisalsoconrmedbyhisco rrespondence withgreat avi ation pioneers of his time particularly Otto Lilienthal. I argue that more than representing apassing fancyofamanimbuedbytheprevailing Zeitgeist thelecture showsBoltzmanns deep concern with the funding of applied research and his att itute towards Technology as an inseparable companion tobasic research. In thenext section I discuss the general context of Boltzman ns early involvement with experimental problems andthesituation ofAeronautics at t hat time bothexperimental and theoretical. Then I present translations of his correspond ence with two aviation pioneers OttoLilienthal and Wilhelm Kress before drawing some conc lusions. A passionfor gadgets Boltzmannsinvolvement withtechnological questionswas notuncommonforhistimesan agemarkedbygreattechnological advancesandapositivist atmosphere. Inhiscasethough it was also closely related to the circumstances of his rst p rofessorship while ofcially appointed to a chair of Mathematical Physics Boltzmann was actually responsible for the setting up of aGeneral Physics course supposed to meet the ne eds of an expanding univer sity . With the opening of a Medical School in Graz in the university authorities werefacedwiththechallenge ofofferingnot onlymorechair sonNatural Sciencesbut also better ones. Physicswasunder theresponsibility ofKarlHu mmelanelder facultymember whose abilities were not up to the new challenges. A decision was made to create a new chair to be occupied by an Extraordinarius. For political reasons this chair was masked under the name of Mathematical Physics while it actually fo resaw that its holder would be responsible for equipping and teaching lab courses. This position was shortly occupied until E. Mach then at Graz managed to have it changed to an Ordinarius status so that he could move from the Mathematics to the Physics chair. Shortl y after doing this Mach left LiterallyOn airship travel. In spite of the word Luftschiff having its exact correspondence in the English Airship airplanes are the maintheme of his talk. A professor subordinated toa FullProfessor or Ordinarius . Nowadays itdenotes anassociate professor.Boltzmann and Technology for Prague in and Boltzmann replaced him two years late r in a position he was to remain for the next years until his return to Vienna. Moreover he had a professional involvement withexperimental researchasaconsequence of hisvisittoH.vonHelmholtzs Institute in Berlin. Helmholtz under whose guidance Hertz was introduced to Eletromag netism was one of the proponents of Maxwells Theory in Germ any. Soit wasnatural that during his Berlin sojournHelmholtz presented him with problems directly related to t he conrmation of Maxwells Theory. In Boltzmann the doyenof Physics in Germany found fertile ground for the austrian newcomer had worked on a the sis about the movement of charges oncurvedsurfaces duringhisPhDandwaswellacquai nted withMaxwellsworks someofwhichhetranslated intoGermanhissupervisor J.S tefan wasalsoanadvocate of Maxwellian Eletromagnetism . Boltzmanns most important contributions to Eletromagnet ism took place during the s and s. His works fall mainly into two lines on the one hand he conducted exper iments which conrmed Maxwells theory thus anticipating Hertz by years . From atheoretical point of view heworked onthe Hall and Thermoe lectric Effects Diamag netismandwroteabookonMaxwellsElectromagnetism nottomentionthefamous StefanBoltzmann Law which relates the intensity of the ele tromagnetic radiation emitted by a blackbody to its temperature . From a total of arti cles he published on Electro magnetism roughly one fth of his whole scientic producti on second only to his output inStatistical Mechanics arepurely experimental anddea l withtherelationship between theindex of refraction nof amedium and thedielectric and permeability constants and respectively . Maxwells theory predicted that these q uantities were related through n . Therelevance of this equation should not beunderestimated for it relates the optical tothe electrical and magnetic properties of a substance one of th e tenets of Maxwellian Eletro magnetism. Starting with sulfur crystals Boltzmann mov ed to a more challenging task tomeasuretheindexofrefractionanddielectricconstant o fsomegases. Sincetheirindexes of refraction areequal to upto the fourth decimal place one can only conrm Maxwells prediction by doing highprecision measurements. Boltzma nn was up to the task and de visednotonlynewandingeniouswaysformeasuringthesequa ntitiesbutalsothenecessary equipment. His results which in some cases are equal to the v alues we use nowadays can be seen inthe following table . He would return to Graz in and remain there for years. B y his own accounts these were the happiest years of his life. S lvio R.Dahmen Substance n Air CO H CO NO Oil Swampgas For all these substances the permeability is very close to so that Eq. reduces to n. There is no clear indication in his article as to which kind o f oil he actually used. As for swamp gas Sumpfgas he meant Methane CH whose index of refraction is known to be one should keep in mind that ndepends on the wavelength and Boltzmanns results are valid for the visible spectrum. These examples are a clear indication that Boltzmann had act ually an insiders knowl edgeofexperimental techniques andconsequently shouldha vebeeninpositiontocritically assess the experimental data on the growing but still insipi ent aeronautical literature as I discuss in the next section. The artof ying Boltzmann had a keen interest in Aeronautics and followed cl osely many pioneers in their attemptstobuildayingmachine particularly OttoLilien thal inBerlinandWilhelmKress in Vienna. The origins of this fascination of his are hard to t race. It is probably a natural consequence of his involvement with still unresolved theor etical questions of Aerodynam ics particularly the problem of viscosity friction for on e should not forget that this was one of the main problems statistical mechanicists were tryi ng to tackle. His interest might have also been stirred by the sheer challenges the practical problem of ying presented as he puts at the beginning of his lecture Thenumberofunsuccesful projects inthiseldAeronautic s islegion. How ever throughout the ages from the legendary Daedalus to Le onardo da Vinci the greatest minds have delved into this problem. There is no other challenge more attractive to Mankind than this one...what about Man w hose trains can overrun thefastest racinghorseandwhoseships notwithst anding theirgigan tic dimensions can manouver with such ease and swiftness so as to mock the sh in their art Wont Heever be able to follow thebirds inth e skies His role in the development of aeronautics was twofold on th e one hand he publicly championed thecause formorefunding andgovernmental supp ort inthisnewareaofprac tical research rst in a lecture and later in a newspaper art icle . On the other hand he had amore indirect role he isnot known to have written anyth eoretical paper onthe topic but aswemayconclude hestimulated oneofhisassistants t odoso thustaking part inthe controversy around Newtons sinesquare law see below for details.Boltzmann and Technology Inthe Gesellschaft DeutscherNaturforscher und Arztethenoneofthemostpres tigious scientic societies convened inViennafor itst hannual meeting. Boltzmann was invited to deliver a lecture. Fully aware of his own stature i n the academic millieuas well as the impact of such a gathering might have for those respons ible for scientic policy he chose to talk about the most recent experiments of Lilient hal Kress and also Hiram S. Maximanamericanengineer livinginEngland. Histalkisar eviewofthemostrecenteld tests with heavierthanair ying machines aerostats had been around for quite a while but Boltzmann dismisses them as unpractical in terms of mas s transportation for these werestill marred byaseries of disavantages If one wants a balloon to lift a man to the skies it would need to have a volume about a thousand times greater indeed...however the deployment of such huge bodies runs counter to their principal characteri stic that is light manouverability. If one wants touse aballoon one has togive upspeed. From this he concluded that airplanes were the only reasonab le solution to air transporta tion This was just the rst step towards the invention of a manouve rable airship. However that one may also use the high speeds needed to overc ome winds as a means of carrying loads can be observed in the ight of birds of prey which after reaching high velocities move through the air almost without beating theirwings. Soweareledtoyingmachineswhichdonotdepen d ontheliftof some gas lighter than air but which use the kinetic energy of a mechanism to carry loads through the skies. Atthispointhemakeshisheartfelt praiseofLilienthalsp ioneeringstudieswithglidersthe man who set the standards for all future studies in the area. H owever true to his scientic spirit he calls his audiences attention to what he thought would be the right propulsion mechanism an airplane would need propellers. Lilienthal b elieved that ying machines would achieve their goal by imitating birds in their art i.e.by the beating of wings. He conducted extensivestudiesontheproleofbirdswingsp articularly storks anddesigned hisgliderswingsaccordingly. Thiswayhecameclosetothe prolesweusenowadaysand was the rst to realize the importance of a curved wing. The ti tle of his book The ight of birds as foundation for the art of ying leaves little room as to what his beliefs really were. Atthis point Boltzmann disagrees however ashe s ays Lift is caused by air resistance acting on a curved surface a principle Well nerandLilienthal mostprecisely measured...however thenece ssary horizon tal speed of an airplane can be attained by some sort of beatin g of wings in which case it closely resembles a bird or bymeans of anairsc rew... . Notwithstanding the high steem hehad for Lilienthal he cou ld not fail to point out that Georg Wellner Czech engineer of austrian orig in professor at the University of B rno Br unn. S lvio R.Dahmen According to Lilienthal the airplane must be divided into tw o halves which move as the wings of a bird when ying. This way one may avoid th e so called slip of the propeller and consequently the power loss due to creation of eddies as Lilienthal believes. This point alone I already d oubt since through the beating of the wings much of the work done when pushing the m down gets lostwhenpullingthemupagainwhilewithanairscrewoneop timallyemploys the advantageous principle of the inclined plane. Maxims p ropellers actually workwithverylittleslip. Moreoverbydividingtheairpla neintomovableparts oneimpairsitssimplicityandstrength. Thebeatingofwing scannotbeattained without serious complications and a considerable friction of its parts it does not run smoothly and is not nely tunable as a propeller. The theoretical calculations are also much morecomplicated. At this point he calls attention upon the little known Wilhel m Kress his countryman. Kressstudies sufferedfrominsufcient funding butinspit eofalldifculties hewasamong the rst to test surface controls on wings aps and ailerons and the use of propellers. Boltzmann used all his rethorics and a great deal of patrioti sm to impress his audience on what their contrymen could achieve ..how much have Germans achieved with sparse means but only through the acuteness of their minds Who dares question this here i n Vienna the place where the Magic Flute the Missa Solemnis and the Ninth Symphony werecomposed Letthe whole wide world tryimitating us if t hey can Rather then showing an ingrained chauvinism of Boltzmann t his statement seems more of arethorical technique tocaptivate hisaudience. Ashesaid theyshould dosomething forit they did not the British would beat them inthis race ...I contemplate proposing to the nance committe of our new ly founded Nat ural Society which is actually still sort of dangling in the air to do something for air travel with their rst available funds and if money i s not enough to convince the government to doso. To make his cause more impressive Boltzmann brought along a s mall prototype of an airplane built by Kress whose design he emphasized was al ready years old. He made the prototype y across the room to the great amusement of hi s audience. According to a witness the plane ewacross thelarge auditorium landing inthe armsof alady . Boltzmann had like few men of his time travelled extensive ly through the european continent and visited the United States twice. He also follo wed his son Arthur on a cruise through the Mediterranean while this was working on his PhD thesis. This certainly made him aware of the advantages air travel would bring It is undeniable how immense the jump in transportation woul d be if one had manouverable airships comparedtowhichrailroads andshi pswouldnoteven come close .Boltzmann and Technology From a theoretical point of view Boltzmann also had a few comm ents to make. It was believedthataheavierthanair machinecouldnotyanar gumentmosttheoreticianstraced all the way back to Newton. In Book II of his Principia Newton dealt with the resistance bodies experienced whenmoving through auid. ForNewt onit wasimportant to nd an argument against the cartesian view that the Universe was lled with matter through which forces were transmitted. If true this would imply tha t planets should experience a resistance to their movement around the sun. Newtons motiv es were thus of a more fun damental character not a practical one. In proposition he asserts that bodies moving through a uid undergo a resistance in a ratio compounded by the ratio of the square of their velocities the ratio of the square of their diameters and a simple ratio of their densi ties. Inmodern parlance thismeansthat theaerodynamic force a bodymoving through air would experience is FA Av. wereisthedensity Aisthecrosssectional areaand vthevelocity. Bytheendoftheth Centurythisformula wastheoretically andexperimentally welljustied. Basedonamodel of a uid as a collection of particles Newton was able to dete rmine FAproposition in the form FAAvsin . This is the famous sinesquare law where is Newtons angle of incidence nowadays called the angle of attack. Adapting it to awingin the form o f aat plate withan angle of attack one can ndthe lift and drag components of FAthrough the relations DFAsinAvsin LFAcosAvsincos These equations are the reason why so many physicists were ve ry pessimistic about the feasibility of an airplane ying if one were to increase lift it would be necessary to increasetheangleofattack. Butthiswouldinturnleadtoam uchfasterincreaseindragor which is the same a rapid decrease in the ratio LDcotan . In other words the drag would become so large as to hinder ight. The predictions bas ed on Newtons arguments are wrong because of his treatment of a uid as individual par ticles. In Gustav J ager who had previously worked with Stefan became Boltzmanns a ssistant. Boltzmann took him under his wing and saw to it that J ager get a position of Extraordinarius in Vienna. During his rst year there J ager published a paper entitled On the resistance that bodies experience when moving through liquids and gases. According to H oechner this work In Aeronautics one speaks of three forces acting on a plane i ts weight a traction provided by the engines andanaerodynamic force. Theaerodynamic forceisusuallyd ecomposedintotwootherforces lift Landdrag D which act perpendicular and parallel to the direction of i ght respectively.The modern relations for drag and lift closely resemble Newtons formula D cDAvandL cLAv. The important drag and lift coefcients cDandcLcanbedeterminedexperimentallyandthefactor isintroducedforconvenience. The maintaskinAeronautics isnding bothcoefcients whichm ay depend on aseries of geometric factors. Zur Frage des Widerstandes welchen bewegtenK orper inFl ussigkeitenund Gasen erfahren. S lvio R.Dahmen received a lot of attention also because of the fact that Bolt zmann highly praised it. The reason for Boltzmanns enthusiasm was that this paper refut ed Newton and the ndings of a commission headed by H. Helmholtz according to which it wou ld be impossible for any machine heavier than air to y . However as late as t he year of Boltzmanns death his colleague Franz Exner still expressed his doubts in an ofcial report about the feasibility of anairplane . AninterestingeffectofBoltzmannsdealingswithAeron auticswasthathissonArthur became a balloonist and later wrote an article on the resista nce of curved surfaces moving through the air . This work deals mainly with experimenta l results on the pressure dis tribution on curved surfaces in thepresence of anair ow. Boltzmannscorrespondence Boltzmann correspondence with Otto Lilienthal and Wilhelm Kress can be attested by the few letters which survived. What seems to have motivated his correspondence with Lilien thal was his need for more detailed information on Lilientha ls studies while preparing his lecture. Boltzmanncertainly knewofhisworkfromhismanyv isitstoBerlinandhadprob ably read Lilienthals inuential book of . Lilienthal was trained as an engineer and after successfully getting the patent rights for a few of his inventions he was able to more completely dedicate himself to his aeronautical studies. W hat characterizes his pioneer ing work is the combination of detailed theoretical studies with eld tests. He paciently improved his gliders stepbystep correcting minor desig n aws and testing them exhaus tively. The rst known letter of Lilienthal to Boltzmann in t he autumn of was an answer to aletter Boltzmann had sent to him Dear Prof. LudwigBoltzmann Vienna It took me a while to reply to your kind letter since I was waiti ng until I could send you copies of my most recent articles on the technique of ight. I just happened to read in the newspaper that you already gave a talk whose re port I followed with great interest. In the meantime allow me to send you two morearticles whereI discuss propellers which you mention at the end of your letter. The October issue of Prometheuswill carry an article of mine with illustrations of myexperimental ight station inthe vicin ities of Berlin. TheprivycounsellorvonStockintheHotelKahlenberg has oneofmygliders. Yours sincerely ... OttoLilienthal. InthemeantimeBoltzmannsendaletter toLordRayleigh dat edOctober wherehe thanks him for sending information onHiram Maxim Thiswasaweeklymagazine whichreportedonadvances inscie nces andindustryaswellascommerce. It was editedinBerlinandcirculated between and . Lilienthalisreferringtoanarticialknollhehadbuiltin Lichterfeldeaneighborhood southwestofBerlin where today one can nda monument tohis memory. The hillwas n amed Fliegeberg or ight mountain.Boltzmann and Technology Mydear Sir I thank you very much for the sending of your excellent book on the theory of sound as well as the synopsis of the article on Mr. Maxim both of wh ich I got while inMunich. With the utmost respect truly yours ... Ludwig Boltzmann. On November Lilienthal replied to another letter he go t from Boltzmann. From his answer wemayconclude that Boltzmann wasinterested in buyi ng one of hisgliders Dear Prof. Boltzmann Vienna It would much please me to send you a light machine. However I n eed some more detailed information on your purposes. The light engin es I build are all based on the stroking principle since in my opinion circul ar movements lead toagreat loss of power. HoweverIbelieve you want anengine w itharotatory motion. In case you want to test it for a short time so that a few minute s sufce I would advise you to use an engine running on liquid carbon dio xide. It exerts apressure of atm. andsmall bottles provide great power. T hat wayyoucan get agreat concentration of power in short times. I thank you for the news. Yours truly ... Otto Lilienthal. What Lilienthal meant by stroking movement was a new princ iple he wanted to apply to a prototype he had just built. In the winter of of he devised a ying machine with movable parts. True to the principles expounded in his b ook Lilienthal believed that ight would be achieved by imitating birds i.e.by the beating of wings as a means of propulsion . Boltzmann however was certain that the bes t solution would be to use a propeller the circular or rotatory movement Lilienthal m entions a principle defended by Kress. Notwithstanding these differences in opinion it seems that Boltzmann really meant buying one of Lilienthals prototypes. This is attest ed by a letter of November where he asks Lilienthal to make a price proposal . On Dec ember Lilienthal nally answered Dear Prof. in reply to your kind letter of November I did some quick c alculations as to how a rotatory machine that is a machine with a rotating en gine could be assembled. I would build a threecylinder engine of which o nly one would be directly fed with carbon dioxide. This way one would get a tri ple expansion without dead point. This engine which in a cycleperse cond regime pro ducesoneHPeffective wouldnotweighmorethankg. Tohave itrunningfor minutesyouwouldneedkgofgas. Abottle withsuchavolume weighskg plusaheaterofkgtokeepthegasfromfreezing. Thissumsup tokgforone Thebook TheTheoryofSound hadjustbeenreleasedinLondon. Thesecondeditionwasout yearslater. S lvio R.Dahmen HP during minutes. For most experiments minutes should be enough. For minutesitwouldbenecessary tocarrykgofgasandthewho leequipment would weigh about kg. I estimate the price of this machine a t about Marks. Respectfully yours ... OttoLilienthal. The engine Lilienthal refers to was a normal stroke piston engine fueled by pressurized CO. Asit wasathreestroke engine Lilienthal proposed combin ing three ofthem toget atriple expansion without deadpoint . Boltzmann most certainly did not buy theprototype as Lilienthals company records do not list him among its cli ents . Moreover such an unusual purchase would not go unrecorded the famous physic ist George FitzGerald not only had of one of Lilienthals gliders but also tested it in D ublin. Another famous client was Nikolai Zhukovsky the father of russian aviation who vi sited Lilienthal on different occasions. WenowcometoBoltzmannsnextpublicmanifest. Thiswasale ttersenttothenewspa perNeuesWienerTagblatt andpublished onJuly wherehemakesreference tohis acclaimed lecture of . From its content one concludes th at critiques on the feasibility of Kresss prototype surfaced I have already expressed mystrong conviction during the Con gress of Natural Scientists in Vienna that among all manouverable ying app aratuses gliders are those which have the highest chance of becoming successf ul. Maxim did buildayingmachinethattookoffwithpeopleonboardbuth edidnotsucceed in solving the stability problem. His machine dropped sudde nly risking the lives of all those in it. However a solution to this problem had already been found lon g ago by Mr. Kress from Vienna. I just became aware of it immediately afte r my lecture. It is true that he managed to get stability on a smallscale model which he actually most successfully demonstrated during my talk. Now doubts have arisen as to whether this stability can be attained for large r models. Against these opinions I would like to say that this must be even simpl er once the necessary resources for their construction are made availa ble. My opinion is conrmed by recent experiments of Langley he built a glider which in spite of not being able to carry a man was much larger than Kresss. This was only possible because instead of using rubber bands he used a marvelous and light HPsteam engine. According to his own reports and that of Alexander Graham Bell the inventor of the telephone we mus t believe that Langley really got enough stability. His model does not seem much different from that of Kress. I believe that Mr. Kress will get a stable m odel by means of careful reasoning. Langley already plans to build a large r one. After these According toNitschthesebottleswerecommonatthetimeand couldbebought inspecializedstores. The models Kress builtwhere propelled byrubber bands prope rly twisted.Boltzmann and Technology results and my talk there can be no doubt that we will manage to build light andpowerfulenginesaswellasstableprototypes andIbeli evethatwithinve years ManwillmakeHisrst longhaul ight toapredetermin ed destination and thiswill certainly take place inAmerica incase myplea f orthesupport of austrian inventors beso successful as it wasduring the Conf erence. To avoid misunderstandings I would like to note that whatev er one accom plishes it wont be a manouverable airplane for practical u se yet. However it will be the most fundamental and important step toward thi s goal. Only when we manage ying for a longer time will improvements foll ow...Professor Ludwig Boltzmann. The last document is a letter of Kress dated August . Kr ess thanks Boltzmann for this article but at the same time criticizes him for being according to Kress over cautious. One cannot fail to notice at the end of the letter a certain pleading attitute of Kress Most steemed Privy Counsellor I would like to thank you immensely for the clear and most favo rable arti cle of yours regarding my endeavors published on the th o f this month in the Neues Wiener Tagblatt. However the last sentence to a void misunder standings showsonceagainyourcaution andunnecessarily dampsapossible growing enthusiasm for gliders. This sentence certainly do es not come from yourveryheart foronenoticesacoldness opposite tothepa ssionate tonepre viously employed. The opponents of gliders who think they c ould do better could hold themselves to these very last words. At the same ti me prospective nancial supporters couldbecomeawryforwhointhesedays giveshismoney away for purely idealistic goals I have just read in LAeron autethat M. Kane from Chicago is building different types of gasoline e ngines following Deningtons design HPweighing kg. HPwith kg or HPwithkg. HPwith kg or HPwithkg. Theinteresting point about thesemodelsisthattheydonotr equirewatercool ing and need only half a liter of gasoline per hour per HP. I wil l ask Chanute in Chicago about it. Bythe way I would like to say once more th at if I had the necessary nancial means I would quickly acquire a light e ngine to make a glider y. Most respectfully yours... Wilhelm Kress. A journal published inParisbetween and . S lvio R.Dahmen An answer to this letter is unknown. Kress does not seem to hav e been that fair with Boltzmann since asKress attests inhis ownbook from onwards hecould count on military as well asBoltzmanns ownnancial support. Had Boltzmann lived to see airplanes ying he would probabl y be sad to see that the words he said at the beginning of his talk in Vienna would unfo rtunately become real ity Our modern armies would stand as much a chance against an iron airplane ying by unassailable dropping dynamite from the heights as a roman army would have against abattery of cannons. Right at the end of histalk Boltzmann concludes Only a rstrate genius can solve the problem of airplane ma nouverability. And this inventor besides being a genius must also be a hero not without great effort will the elements to be harnessed give up their s ecrets. Only those who have the courage to trust their lives to these new element s cunningly circumventing itscaveats willstandachanceofvictoryov erthedragonwhich hides the treasures of this discovery from mankind. Two years after these words Otto Lilienthal whom Boltzmann highly praised died as a consequence of an accident while on one of his routine ights . Unfortunately there is no recordsofBoltzmannonthisuntimelydeathashisownuntim elydeathpreventedhimfrom seeing his dream become reality. Conclusions As the historian of science A. Vucinich once wrote we must be careful not to exaggerate the role of sociocultural conditions in stimulating scien tic discoveries . However technological advances are to a great measure dictated by th e needs of society and science may grow as a response to technological challenges. Accordi ng to Vucinich ... No com petent scientist would deny the essentially utilitarian qu ality of scientic knowledge but none would go on to argue that the scientic community should concern itself exclusively with solving the acute problems of the day . These words could well have been said byBoltzmannhimself. Hehadaprofound interest inthetechn ological developments ofhis times particularly aviation an interest which in my opini on went beyound that of an edu cated scientist. As I argued in this essay when the opportun ity presented itself for him to intervene publicly and promote aviation he did not waver he lectured a highly prestigious audience inandsentalettertwoyearslatertoViennas important NeuesWienerTage blatturgingauthoritiestoprovidemorefundinglestAmericabea tAustriaintherace. From the point of view of basic research he supported his assistan t Gustav J ager who published an article countering the accepted view that heavierthan air machines could not y and probably was responsible for his son Arthurs later involve ment with Aerodynamics. HisBoltzmann and Technology ideas in Physics were revolutionary but so was his belief in Aviation when time came for him to openly position himself against the majority who did n ot believe that ying would one day become reality he did sowithout hesitation. Acknowledgments I would like to thank the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation f or the nancial support and the TP Group at W urzburg for hospitality and discussio ns. Dr. B. Lukasch from the Lilienthal Museum in Anklam Germany kindly sent me materi al on O. Lilienthal and a copy of A. Boltzmanns article. All translations from the or iginal texts are my own. This article is an extended and revised version of an essay I wrote in Portuguese during the celebration of Boltzmanns Year which waspublished in . 