 The continuum representation of matter is widely used for ma terial dynamics in science and engineering. Spatiallyresolved continuum dynamics simulations are the most widespread and familiar solving the initial va lue problem by dis cretizing the spatial domain and integrating the dynamical equations forward in time to predict the motion and deformation of components o f the system. Email address dswiftlanl.gov Damian C. Swift. Preprint submitted to Elsevier March LAUR This type of simulation is used for instance to study hyper velocity impact problems such as the vulnerability of armor to projectiles the perfor mance of satellite debris shields and the impact of mete orites with plan ets notably the formation of the moon . The problem can be divided into the dynamical equations of the continuum the state eld of t he components svector r and the inherent properties of the materials. Given the lo cal material states the material properties allow the stress to be determined. Given the stress eld vector r and mass density eld vector r the dynamical equations describe the elds of acceleration compression and thermodynamic work done on the materials. The equations of continuum dynamics describe the behavior o f a dynami cally deforming system of arbitrary complexity. Particula r simpler deforma tion paths can be described more compactly by dierent sets o f equations and solved by dierent techniques than those used for contin uum dynamics in general. Simpler deformation paths occur often in experi ments designed to develop and calibrate models of material properties. The se paths can be regarded as dierent ways of interrogating the material pro perties. The princi pal examples in material dynamics are shock and ramp compres sion. Typical experiments are designed to induce such loading histories a nd measure or in fer the properties of the material in these states before the y are destroyed by reected waves. The development of the eld of material dynamics was driven b y applications in the physics of hypervelocity impact and high explosive sy stems including nuclear weapons . In the regimes of interest typically c omponents with dimensions ranging from millimeters to meters and pressure s from GPa to TPa material behavior is dominated by the scalar equation of state EOS the relationship between pressure compression or mass de nsity and inter nal energy. Other components of stress specically shear s tresses are much smaller and chemical explosives react promptly so can be tr eated by simple models of complete detonation. EOS were developed as ts to e xperimen tal data particularly to series of shock states and to isoth ermal compression measurements . It is relatively straightforward to cons truct shock and ramp compression states from an EOS algebraically or numericall y depending on the EOS and to t an EOS to these measurements. More recently applica tions and scientic interest have grown to include a wider ra nge of pressures and time scales such as laserdriven inertial connement f usion and ex periments are designed to measure other aspects than the EOS such as the kinetics of phase changes constitutive behavior describi ng shear stresses in complete chemical reactions and the eects of microstruct ure such as grain orientation and porosity. Theoretical techniques have als o evolved to predict the EOS with accuracy and elastic contributions to shear stress wi th slightly poorer accuracy . In this paper a general convention for representing materi al states is described and numerical methods are reported for calculating shock an d ramp compres sion states from general representations of material prope rties. Conceptual structure for material properties The desired structure for the description of the material st ate and properties under dynamic loading was developed to be as general as possi ble with respect to the types of material or models to be represented in the sam e framework and designed from the greatest amount of commonality betwee n spatially resolved simulations and calculations of shock and ramp com pressions. In condensed matter on submicrosecond time scales heat co nduction is often too slow to have a signicant eect on the response of the mate rial and is ignored here. The equations of nonrelativistic continu um dynamics are in Lagrangian form i.e. along characteristics moving with t he local material velocity vector uvector r Dvector r t Dtvector r tdivvector uvector r t Dvector uvector r t Dt vector r tdivvector r t Devector r t Dtvector r tgradvector uvector r t where is the mass density and ethe specic internal energy. Changes in e can be related to changes in the temperature Tthrough the heat capacity. The inherent properties of each material in the problem are d escribed by its constitutive relation or equation of state s. As well as experiencing compression and work from mechanical deformation the loca l material state svector r t can evolve through internal processes such as plastic ow. In general Dsvector r t Dtssvector r t Uvector r t Ugradvector uvector r t which can also include the equations for t andet. Thus the mate rial properties must describe at a minimum s and ssvector r t Uvector r t for each material. If they also describe Ts the conductivity and se then heat conduction can be treated. Other functions may be needed for particular nu merical methods in continuum dynamics such as the need for w ave speeds e.g. the longitudinal sound speed which are needed for ti me step control in explicit time integration. Internally within the materia l properties models it is desirable to reuse software as much as possible and othe r functions of the state are therefore desirable to allow models to be construc ted in a modular and hierarchical way. Inevitably arithmetic manipulatio ns must be performed on the state which can be encoded neatly using operator over loading. For instance if sis calculated in a forwardtime numerical method then chang es of state are calculated using numerical evolution equation s such as stt st ts. Thus for a general state s it is necessary to multiply it by a real number and to add two states together. For a specic software implem entation other operations may be needed for example to create copy or des troy a new instance of a state. A very wide range of types of material behavior can be represe nted with this formalism. At the highest level dierent types of behavior are characterized by dierent structures for the state sTable . For each type of state dierent specic models can be dened such as perfect gas and Gr unei sen EOS. For each specic model dierent materials are represented by c hoosing dierent values for the parameters in the model and dierent local ma terial states are represented through dierent values for the components of s. In the jargon objectoriented programming this is polymorphism. State s or models may be dened by extending or combining other states or models t his can be implemented using the objectoriented programming concep t of inheritance. Trial implementations have been made as libraries in the C and Java pro gramming languages. The external interface to the material properties was general at the level of representing a generic material type and state. The type of state and model were then selected when programs usin g the material properties library were run. In C objects which were poly morphic at run time had to be represented as pointers requiring additiona l software construc tions to allocate and free up physical memory associated wit h each object. It was possible to include general reusable functions as poly morphic objects when dening models real functions of one real parameter co uld be polyno mials transcendentals tabular with dierent interpolat ion schemes piecewise denitions over dierent regions of the one dimensional lin e sums products etc again dened specically at run time. Objectoriented polymorphism and inheritance were thus very powerful techniques for increas ing software reuse making the software more compact and more reliable through t he possibility of using functions which had already been tested. Given conceptual and software structures designed to repre sent general ma terial properties suitable for use in spatiallyresolved c ontinuum dynamics simulations we now consider the use of these generic materi al models for calculating ramp and shock compression. Table Examples of types of material model distinguished by dier ent structures in the state vector. model state vector eect of mechanical strain s smsgradu equation of state e divvector updivvector u complete equation of state T divvector updivvector uc v heterogeneous mixture ef vi divvector updivvector ui homogeneous mixture Tfmi divvector updivvector uc vi traditional deviatoric strength e p divvector updivvector ufpp GeradicalBig fp The symbols are mass density e specic internal energy T temperature fv volume fraction fm mass fraction stress deviator fp fraction of plastic work converted to heat grad up plastic part of velocity gradient G shear modulus ep elastic and plastic parts of strain rate deviator p scalar equivalent plastic strain f factor in eective strain magnitude. Reacting solid explos ives can be represented as heterogeneous mixtures one component being the reacted pr oducts reaction a pro cess of internal evolution transfers material from unreac ted to reacted components. Gasphase reaction can be represented as a homogeneous mixt ure reactions trans ferring mass between components representing dierent typ es of molecule. Symmet ric tensors such as the stress deviator are represented more compactly by their unique upper triangular components e.g. using Voigt notat ion. Ramp compression Ramp compression is taken here to mean compression or decomp ression. If the material is represented by a scalar EOS i.e. ignoring an y eects of plastic ow ramp compression follows an isentrope. This is no longe r true when dissipative processes such as plastic heating occur. The te rm quasiisentropic is sometimes used in this context particularly for shockle ss compression here we prefer to refer to the thermodynamic trajectories as adia bats since this is a more appropriate term no heat is exchanged with the surrou ndings on the time scales of interest. For adiabatic compression the state evolves according to t he second law of thermodynamics dep dv i.e. epvpdivvector u of for a more general material whose stress tensor is more com plicated than a scalar pressure endvendivvector u where nis the component of stress normal to the direction of deforma tion. The velocity gradient was expressed through a compression f actorrho and a strain rate . In all ramp experiments used in the development and cal ibration of accurate material models the strain has been ap plied uniaxially. More general strain paths for instance isotropic or includ ing a shear compo nent can be treated by the same formalism and that the heati ng rate would then be a full inner product of the stress and strain tensors. The acceleration or deceleration of the material normal to t he wave as it is compressed or expanded adiabatically is Du DvradicalBigg n v from which it can be deduced that Du Dcl where clis the longitudinal wave speed. As with continuum dynamics internal evolution of the mater ial state can be calculated simultaneously with the continuum equations or operator split and calculated periodically at constant compression. The r esults are the same to second order in the compression increment. Operatorspl itting is desirable when internal evolution can produce highly nonlinear chang es such as reaction from solid to gas rapid changes in state and properties can m ake numerical schemes unstable. Operatorsplitting is also desirable wh en the integration time step for internal evolution is much shorter than the con tinuum dynamics time step. Neither of these considerations is very importan t for ramp compres sion without spatial resolution but operatorsplitting w as used as an option in the ramp compression calculations for consistency with con tinuum dynamics simulations. The ramp compression equations were integrated using forwa rdtime Runge Kutta numerical schemes of second order. The fourth order sc heme is a trivial extension. The sequence of operations to calculate an incre ment of ramp com pression is as follows Time increment tln Predictor stt st t smst Corrector stt st tsmstt Internal evolution sttstt ttintegraldisplay tsistdt where smis the modeldependent state evolution from applied strain and si is internal evolution at constant compression. The independent variable for integration is specic volume vor mass density for numerical integration nite steps are taken in andv. The step size can be controlled so that the numerical error during integra tion remains within chosen limits. A tabular adiabat can be calculated by integrating over a range of vor but when simulating experimental scenarios the upper limi t for integration is usually that one of the other thermodynamic q uantities reaches a certain value for example that the normal component of str ess reaches zero which is the case on release from a high pressure state a t a free surface. Specic stop conditions were found by monitoring the quanti ty of interest until bracketed by a nite integration step then bisecting until the stop condition was satised to a chosen accuracy. During bisection each tr ial calculation was performed as an integration from the rst side of the bracket by the trial compression. Shock compression Shock compression is the solution of a Riemann problem for th e dynamics of a jump in compression moving with constant speed and with a constant thickness. The RankineHugoniot RH equations descr ibing the shock compression of matter are derived in the continuum approxim ation where the shock is a formal discontinuity in the continuum elds. I n reality matter is composed of atoms and shocks have a nite width governed b y the kinetics of dissipative processes at a fundamental level matter do es not distinguish between shock compression and ramp compression with a high s train rate but the RH equations apply as long as the width of the region of matter where unresolved processes occur is constant. Compared with the i sentropic states induced by ramp compression in a material represented by an E OS a shock always increases the entropy and hence the temperature. Wit h dissipative processes included the distinction between a ramp and a sho ck may become blurred. The RH equations express the conservation of mass momentum and energy across a moving discontinuity in state. They are usually exp ressed in terms of the pressure but are readily generalized for materials sup porting shear stresses by using the component of stress normal to the shock i.e. pa rallel with the direction of propagation of the shock n u sv nn vv upradicalBig nnvv ee nnvv where usis the speed of the shock wave with respect to the material upis the change in material speed normal to the shock wave i.e. p arallel to its direction of propagation and subscript refers to the ini tial state. The RH relations can be applied to general material models if a time scale or strain rate is imposed and an orientation chosen for the m aterial with respect to the shock. Shock compression in continuum dynami cs is almost always uniaxial. The RH equations involve only the initial and nal states in t he material. If a material has properties that depend on the deformation path such as plas tic ow or viscosity then physically the detailed shock str ucture may make a dierence . This is a limitation of discontinuous shoc ks in continuum dynamics it may be addressed as discussed above by includin g dissipative processes and considering ramp compression if the dissipa tive processes can be represented adequately in the continuum approximation. Spatiallyresolved simulations with numerical dierentiation to obtain spati al derivatives and for ward time dierencing are usually not capable of representi ng shock disconti nuities directly and an articial viscosity is used to smea r shock compression over a few spatial cells . The trajectory followed by the material in ther modynamic space is a smooth adiabat with dissipative heatin g supplied by the articial viscosity. If plastic work is also included du ring this adiabatic compression the overall heating for a given compression is greater than from the RH equations. To be consistent plastic ow should be neg lected while the articial viscosity is nonzero. This localized disabl ing of physical pro cesses particularly timedependent ones during the pass age of the unphys ically smeared shock was previously found necessary for num erically stable simulations of detonation waves by reactive ow . Detonation waves are reactive shock waves. Steady planar de tonation the ChapmanJouguet state may be calculated using the RH r elations by imposing the condition that the material state behind the sh ock is fully re acted. Several numerical methods have been used to solve the RH equa tions for materials represented by an EOS only . The general RH equations may be solved numerically for a given shock compression by varying the specic internal energy euntil the normal stress from the material model equals that from the RH energy equation Eq. . The shock and particle sp eeds are then calculated from Eqs and . This numerical method is p articularly convenient for EOS of the form p e asemay be varied directly. Solutions may still be found for general material models using se by which the energy may be varied until the solution is found. Numerically the solution was found by bracketing and bisec tion For given compression take the lowenergy end for bracketing as a nearby state se.g. the previous state of lower compression on the Hugoniot compressed adiabatically to state s and cooled so the spe cic internal energy is es. Bracket the desired state apply successively larger he ating increments eto s evolving each trial state internally until ns from the material model exceeds nee from Eq. . Bisect in e evolving each trial state internally until ns equals ne e to the desired accuracy. As with ramp compression the independent variable for solu tion was mass density and nite steps were taken. Each shock state was calculated independently of the rest so numerical errors did not accum ulate along the shock Hugoniot. The accuracy of the solution was independen t of . A tab ular Hugoniot can be calculated by solving over a range of but again when simulating experimental scenarios it is usually more usefu l to calculate the shock state where one of the other thermodynamic quantities reaches a cer tain value often that upandnmatch the values from another simultaneous shock calculation for another material the situation in im pact and shock transmission problems discussed below. Specic stop cond itions were found by monitoring the quantity of interest until bracketed by a nite solution step then bisecting until the stop condition was satised to a cho sen accuracy. Dur ing bisection each trial calculation was performed as a sho ck from the initial conditions to the trial shock compression. Composite loading paths Given methods to calculate shock and adiabatic loading path s from arbitrary initial states a considerable variety of experimental sce narios can be treated from the interaction of loading or unloading waves with inte rfaces between dif ferent materials in planar geometry for uniaxial compress ion. The key physical constraint is that if two dissimilar materials are to remai n in contact after an interaction such as an impact or the passage of a shock the no rmal stress n and particle speed upin both materials must be equal on either side of the interface. The change in particle speed and stress normal to the waves were calculated above for compression waves running in the direc tion of increasing spatial ordinate left to right. Across an interface the s ense is reversed for the material at the left. Thus a projectile impacting a stati onary target to the right is decelerated from its initial speed by the shock indu ced by impact. The general problem at an interface can be analyzed by consid ering the states at the instant of rst contact on impact or when a sho ck travel ing through a sandwich of materials rst reaches the interfa ce. The initial states are ul slur sr. The nal states are uj s luj r rwhere ujis the joint particle speed ns l ns r and s iis connected to siby either a shock or an adiabat starting at the appropriate initial velocity and stress and with orientation given by the side of the system each material occ urs on. Each type of wave is considered in turn looking for an intersection in theupnplane. Examples of these wave interactions are the impact of a proje ctile with a sta tionary target Fig. release of a shock state at a free sur face or a material e.g. a window of lower shock impedance hence reecting a r elease wave into the shocked material Fig. reshocking at a surface w ith a material of higher shock impedance Fig. or tension induced as mater ials try to sepa rate in opposite directions when joined by a bonded interfac e Fig. . Each of these scenarios may occur in turn following the impact of a pr ojectile with a target if the target is layered then a shock is transmitted a cross each interface with a release or a reshock reected back depending on the ma terials release ultimately occurs at the rear of the projectile and the far en d of the target and the oppositelymoving release waves subject the projec tile and target to tensile stresses when they interact Fig. . An extension of this analysis can be used to calculate the int eraction of oblique shocks with an interface . initial state particle speednormal stress initial state of projectileprincipal Hugoniot of targetprincipal Hugoniot of projectile shock state intersection of target Fig. . Wave interactions for the impact of a at projectile m oving from left to right with a stationary target. Dashed arrows are a guide to the seq uence of states. For a projectile moving from right to left the construction is th e mirror image reected in the normal stress axis. states particle speednormal stress secondary Hugoniot of target initial shock state in targetprincipal Hugoniot high impedance window low impedance window target release isentrope target release at free surfacewindow release Fig. . Wave interactions for the release of a shocked state shock moving from left to right into a stationary window material to its right. T he release state depends whether the window has a higher or lower shock impedance than the shocked mate rial. Dashed arrows are a guide to the sequence of states. For a shock moving from right to left the construction is the mirror image reected in the normal stress axis. Preferred representation of isotropic strength There is an inconsistency in the standard continuum dynamic s treatment of scalar pressure and tensor stress response. The scalar EOS expresses the pressure p e as the dependent quantity which is the most convenient for m projectile releasein projectile and target final tensile state in projectile and targetparticle speednormal stress target release target releaseprojectile releaseinitial shock state Fig. . Wave interactions for the release of a shocked state b y tension induced as materials try to separate in opposite directions when joine d by a bonded interface. Material damage spall and separation are neglected the c onstruction shows the maximum tensile stress possible. For general material prop erties e.g. if plastic ow is included the state of maximum tensile stress is not just t he negative of the initial shock state. Dashed arrows are a guide to the sequence of stat es. The graph shows the initial state after an impact by a projectile moving from right to left for a shock moving from right to left the construction is the mirr or image reected in the normal stress axis. for use in the continuum equations. Standard practice is to u se subHookean elasticity hypoelastic form described above in whi ch the state parame ters include the stress deviator evolved by integration Gs where Gis the shear modulus and the strain rate deviator. Thus the isotropic and deviatoric contributions to stress are not treated in an equivalent way the pressure is calculated from a local state involving a str ainlike parameter mass density whereas the stress deviator evolves with th e timederivative of strain. This inconsistency causes problems along compli cated loading paths because Gvaries strongly with compression if a material is subjecte d to a tension time projectile windowtarget impact shocks transmitted shock reflected wave free surface release release interactions Fig. . Schematic of uniaxial wave interactions induced by t he impact of a at projectile with a composite target. shear strain then isotropic compression increases the shear modulus f rom GtoG leaves unchanged then shear unloading to isotropic stress the true unloading strain is whereas the hypoelastic calculation would require a strain of GG. The stress can be considered as a direct response of the mater ial to the instan taneous state of elastic strain T. This relation can be predicted directly with electronic structure calculations of the stress tenso r in a solid for a given compression and elastic strain state and is a direct gen eralization of the scalar equation of state. A more consistent representation of the state param eters is to use the strain deviator rather than and to calculate from scratch when required using Gs a hyperelastic formulation. The state parameters are then e p. The dierent formulations give dierent answers when devia toric strain is accumulated at dierent compressions in which case the hyp erelastic formu lation is correct. If the shear modulus varies with strain de viator i.e. for nonlinear elasticity then the denition of G must be adjusted to give the same stress for a given strain. Many isotropic strength models use scalar measures of the st rain and stress to parameterize work hardening and to apply a yield model of ow stress radicalBig fradicalBig f. Inconsistent conventions for equivalent scalar measures h ave been used by dierent workers. In the present work the common shock phys ics convention was used that the ow stress component of nis Ywhere Yis the ow stress. For consistency with published speeds and amplitudes for el astic waves f f in contrast to other values previously used for lowerrate deformation . In principle the values of fandfdo not matter as long as the strength parameters were calibrated using the same values then used i n any simulations. Examples In this section the numerical methods described above are a pplied to example materials demonstrating the eects of strength and chemic al reaction on the loading paths. The materials chosen were air represented by a perfect gas EOS the elemental metals Be and Mo. The perfect gas case tests the numerical schemes against analytic results. Be has been shown to exhib it relatively high ow stresses for deformation on the nanosecond time scales o f interest for its application as the fuel capsule and ablator in inertial c onnement fusion . Mo is interesting as experimental measurements sugge st that its shock temperature is signicantly greater than expected using th e EOS only . . Air Air was chosen as an example of matter represented by the scal ar EOS only taken here to be the perfect gas EOS p e with .. Air at standard temperature and pressure has approximate ly gcmande .MJkg. Isentropes for the perfect gas EOS have the form pconstant . . . . .pressure GPa mass density gcmisentropeHugoniot . . . . . .pressure difference mass density gcmisentropeHugoniot Fig. . Principal isentrope and shock Hugoniot for air perf ect gas numerical cal culations for general material models compared with analy tic results. and shock Hugoniots have the form p ep . The numerical methods above reproduced the principal isent rope and Hugo niot to and . respectively for a compression increment of al ong the isentrope and a solution tolerance of GPa for each shock state Fig. . Over most of the range the error in the Hugoniot was . or l ess only ap proaching . near the maximum shock compression. . Complete equation of state for metals Empirical EOS for Be and Mo have been published that were tted to shock data acquired from microsecond scale impact experi ments. This Gr uneisen EOS had the form p e so the temperature Twas not directly available. Temperatures were calculated by reference to a c ompression curve along which the temperature and specic internal energy wer e known Tr er and using a specic heat capacity dened as a function of dens itycv con stant in practice. The reference curve chosen was the zero k elvin isotherm cold curve Tr K. This was calculated from the principal isentrope esusing the estimated density variation of Gr uneisen parame ter er esTcpeaparenleftBigg parenrightBigga . In the calculations this augmented EOS was represented as a mechanical thermal form comprising any p e EOS plus the reference curves an ex ample of inheritance and polymorphism. Empirical EOS are calibrated using experimental data. Shoc k and adiabatic compression measurements on strong materials inevitably i nclude elasticplastic contributions as well as the scalar EOS itself. If the elasti cplastic contributions are not taken into account selfconsistently the EOS may im plicitly include contributions from the strength. A unique scalar EOS can be c onstructed to reproduce the normal stress as a function of compression for any unique load ing path shock or adiabat for a constant or smoothlyvaryi ng strain rate. Such as EOS would not generally predict the normal stress for other load ing histories. The Gr uneisen EOS and SteinbergGuinan str ength model for the materials discussed below were constructed selfconsi stently from shock data this does not mean the models are accurate for other loa ding paths as neither the EOS nor the strength model includes all the physi cal terms that real materials exhibit. This does not in any case matter for t he purposes of demonstrating the properties of the numerical schemes. . Beryllium The ow stress measured from laserdriven shock experiment s on Be crystals a few tens of micrometers thick is at around GPa much gre ater than the ..GPa measured on microsecond time scales. A timedep endent crystal plasticity model for Be is being developed and the behavior under dynamic loading depends on the detailed time dependence of plastici ty. Calculations were performed with the SteinbergGuinan strength model de veloped for mi . . . . . . normal stress GPa volume compressioneach pair of lines upper is Hugoniot lower is adiabat Fig. . Principal adiabat and shock Hugoniot for Be in normal stresscompression space neglecting strength dashed for SteinbergGuina n strength solid and for elasticperfectly plastic with Y GPa dotted. crosecond scale data and for the purposes of rough com parison with elasticperfectly plastic response with a ow stress of G Pa. The elastic perfectly plastic model neglected pressure and work harden ing. Calculations were made of the principal adiabat and shock Hu goniot and of a release adiabat from a state on the principal Hugoniot. Cal culations were made with and without strength. Considering the state traje ctories in stress volume space it is interesting to note that heating from pla stic ow may push the adiabat above the Hugoniot because of the greater heati ng obtained by integrating along the adiabat compared with jumping from th e initial to the nal state on the Hugoniot Fig. . Even with an elasticper fectly plastic strength model the withstrength curves do not lie exactly Yabove the strengthless curves because heating from plastic ow cont ributes an increasing amount of internal energy to the EOS as compression increase s. An important characteristic for the seeding of instabiliti es by microstructural variations in shock response is the shock stress at which an e lastic wave does not run ahead of the shock. In Be with the high ow stress of nan osecond response the relation between shock and particle speeds is signicantly dif ferent from the relation for low ow stress Fig. . For low ow stress the elastic wave travels at .kms. A plastic shock travels fa ster than this for pressures greater than GPa independent of the constitu tive model. The speed of a plastic shock following the initial elastic wave i s similar to the low strength case because the material is already at its ow str ess but the speed of a single plastic shock is appreciably higher. For compression to a given normal stress the temperature is signicantly shock speed kms normal stress GPaelastic wave plastic shock Fig. . Principal adiabat and shock Hugoniot for Be in shock s peednormal stress space neglecting strength dashed for SteinbergGuina n strength solid and for elasticperfectly plastic with Y GPa dotted. higher with plastic ow included. The additional heating is particularly strik ing on the principal adiabat the temperature departs signi cantly from the principal isentrope. Thus rampwave compression of strong materials may lead to signicant levels of heating contrary to common assumpt ions of small tem perature increases . Plastic ow is largely irreversib le so heating occurs on unloading as well as loading. Thus on adiabatic release f rom a shock compressed state additional heating occurs compared with the nostrength case. These levels of heating are important as shock or relea se melting may occur at a signicantly lower shock pressure than would be ex pected ignoring the eect of strength. Fig. . . Molybdenum Experiments have been reported in which samples of Mo were su bjected to shock loading on microsecond time scales by projectile impa ct and the tem perature in the shocked state was measured by neutron resona nce spectrome try . The temperature measured was around K greater t han predicted using EOS that are thought to be accurate to a few percent. The principal shock Hugoniot of Mo was calculated using mate rial properties previously published with parameters for the Steinbe rgGuinan strength model which includes workhardening pressurehard ening and thermal softening eects. The shock Hugoniot with strength lay at a s ignicantly higher temperature than the calculation ignoring strength which matched the previouslyreported shock Hugoniot Fig. . The tempe rature dierence normal stress GPa temperature Kprincipal adiabat principal Hugoniot release adiabat Fig. . Principal adiabat shock Hugoniot and release adia bat for Be in nor mal stresstemperature space neglecting strength dashe d for SteinbergGuinan strength solid and for elasticperfectly plastic with Y GPa dotted. normal stress GPa temperature Kprincipal adiabat principal Hugoniot release adiabat Fig. . Principal shock Hugoniot for Mo in normal stresstem perature space ne glecting strength dashed and for SteinbergGuinan stren gth solid. Also shown is the experimental measurement of shock temperature by neu tron resonance spec trometry. was around K for the shock pressures of around GPa of the e xperiments a signicant contribution to the discrepancy but not all. T he complete ex planation involves nonidealities in the projectile accel erating system and is discussed elsewhere . Conclusions A general formulation was developed to represent material m odels for appli cations in dynamic loading suitable for software implemen tation in object oriented programming languages. Numerical methods were de vised to calcu late the response of matter represented by the general mater ial models to shock and ramp compression and ramp decompression by dire ct evaluation of the thermodynamic pathways for these compressions rathe r than spatially resolved simulations. This approach is a generalization of earlier work on so lutions for materials represented by a scalar equation of st ate. The numerical methods were found to be exible and robust capable of appli cation to mate rials with very dierent properties. The numerical solutio ns matched analytic results to a high accuracy. Care was needed with the interpretation of some types of phys ical response such as plastic ow when applied to deformation at high stra in rates. The underlying timedependence of processes occurring during deformation should be taken into account. The actual history of loading and heat ing experienced by material during the passage of a shock may inuence the na l state this history is not captured in the continuum approximation to ma terial dynamics where shocks are treated as discontinuities. Thus care is al so needed in spa tially resolved simulations when shocks are modeled using a rticial viscosity to smear them unphysically over a nite thickness. The basic ramp and shock solution methods were coupled to sol ve for compos ite deformation paths such as shockinduced impacts and s hock interactions with a planar interface between dierent materials. Such ca lculations capture much of the physics of typical material dynamics experiment s without requir ing spatiallyresolving simulations. Example calculations were made of loading histories in Be an d Mo illustrating the eects of plastic work on the temperatures induced in qua siisentropic and shockrelease experiments. Acknowledgments Ian Gray introduced me to the concept of multimodel materia l properties software. Lee Markland developed a prototype Hugoniotcal culating computer program for equations of state while working for me as an unde rgraduate summer student. Evolutionary work on material properties libraries was sup ported by the U.K. Atomic Weapons Establishment Fluid Gravity Engineering L td and Wessex Scientic and Technical Services Ltd. Thanks are due to Steve Batha for funding through the Nationa l Nuclear Se curity Agencys Campaign Inertial Connement Fusion. The work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energ y under con tracts WENG and DEACNA 