 The Serpens starforming cloud is one of ve such large cloud s selected for observation as part of The Spitzer Legacy project From Molecular Cores t o Planetforming Disks cd Evans et al. . Previous papers in this series have desc ribed the observational results in the Serpens Cloud as seen with IRAC Harvey et. al. Pap er I and MIPS Harvey et al. as well as some of the other clouds Jorgensen et al. Rebull et al. . In this paper we examine how the combination of the IRAC and MIPS data together with other published results on this region can be used to nd and charac terize a highly reliable catalog of young stellar objects YSOs in the surveyed area. With t he combination of broad wavelength coverage and amazing depth of Spitzers sensiti vity we are able to probe to both extremely low luminosity limits for YSOs and to cover a very wide range in dust emission both in optical depth and in range of emitting temperatures. The Spitzer wavelength region is particularly well tuned for sensitivity to dust at temper atures appropriate for solarsystem size disks around young stars. The region of the Serpens Cloud mapped in our survey is an area rich in star for mation. Eiroa Djupvik Casali have extensively rev iewed studies at a variety of wavelengths of this area. There is evidence from previous ob servations of strong cluster ing Testi et al. Testi Sargent dense submm co res Casali Eiroa Duncan Enoch et al. and highvelocity outows Ziener Eisloel Davis et al. . PreSpitzer infrared surveys of the cloud have been m ade by IRAS Zhang et al. Zhang Laureijs Clark and ISO Kaas et al. Djup vik et al. as well as the pioneering groundbased surveys that rst identied it as a n important region of star forma tion Strom Vrba Strom . Using MIPS and all four bands of IRAC the cd program has mapped a . degportion of this cloud that includes a very wellstudied clus ter of in frared and submillimeter sources Eiroa Casali Hog erheijde van Dishoeck Salverda Hurt Barsony Harvey Wilking Joy Testi Sargent . At its distance of pc Straizys Cernis Bartasiute this correspond s to an area of about . pc. In paper I we identied at least two main centers of star f ormation as seen by Spitzer in this cloud that we referred to as Cluster A and B. Cluster A is the very wellstudied grouping also commonly referred to as the Serp ens Core. Cluster B was the subject of a recent multiwavelength study by Djupvik et al. who referred to it as the Serpens GG cluster. The YSOs with high signaltonoise that we have catalog ued constitute a suciently large number that we can examine statistically the numbers o f objects in various evolutionary states and the range of disk properties for dierent classes of YSOs. We characterize the circumstellar material with colorcolor diagrams that all ow comparison with other recent studies of starforming regions and we model the energy dis tributions of the large number of YSOs that appear to be starcircumstellar disk systems. We are able to construct the YSO luminosity function for Serpens since we have complete s pectral coverage for all the sources over the range of wavelengths where their luminosit y is emitted and we are able to characterize the selection eects inherent in the luminosi ty function from comparison with the publicly available and signicantly deeper SWIRE survey Surace et al. . We nd that the population of YSOs extends down to luminosities be low L and we discuss the signicance of this population. Our complete coverage in wa velength and luminosity space also permits us to discuss the spatial distribution of YSOs to an unprecedented completeness level. We note also that unlike the situation discussed by J orgensen et al. for Perseus in Serpens there do not appear to be any very deeply embedded Y SOs that are not found by our YSO selection criteria. In we briey review the observational details of this program and then in we describe in detail the process by which we identify YSOs and eliminate background contam inants. In we describe a search for variability in our dataset. We comp are our general results on YSOs with those of earlier studies of the Serpens starforming region in . We discuss in the YSO luminosity function in Serpens and in particular the low end of this function. We next analyze the spatial distribution of star f ormation in the surveyed area and compare it to the distribution of dust extinction as deri ved from our observations in . In we construct several colorcolor diagrams that character ize the global properties of the circumstellar material and show modeling results for a large fraction of our YSOs that appear to be stardisk systems. Finally discusses several specic groups of objects including the coldests YSOs and a previously identied di sappearing YSO. We also men tion several obvious highvelocity outows from YSOs that will certainly be the subject of further study. . Observations The parameters of our observations have already been descri bed in detail in Paper I for IRAC and in a companion study Harvey et al. for MIPS. We summarize here some of the issues most relevant to this study. We remind the reader that the angular resolution of the Spitz er imaging instruments varies widely with wavelength since Spitzer is diraction limited longward of m. In the shorter IRAC bands the spatial resolution is of order while from m it goes from roughly to . The area chosen for mapping was dened by the AV contour in the extinction map of Cambr esy and by practical ti me constraints Evans et al. . With the exception of a small area of . degon the northeast edge of the IRAC map all of the area mapped with IRAC was also covered with MIP S at both and m and most of it at m. As described by Harvey et al. some substantial add itional area was observed with MIPS without matching IRAC observati ons. In this current paper we restrict our attention to only the area that was observed f rom . to m . deg. This entire region was observed from . to m at two epochs with a time separation of several hours to several days but at only one epoch at m. We also specically do not include the m observations in our discussion because they did not cover t he entire area and because most of the YSOs in Serpens are too closely clust ered to be distinguishable in the large beam of the m data. Harvey et al. discuss briey the extended m emission in this region and the four pointlike sources foun d at m. Figure shows the entire area mapped with all four IRAC bands and MIPS at and m and also indicates the locations of several areas mentioned in the text. In addition to this area of the Serpens cloud dened by relati vely high A V we also observed small ocloud regions around the molecular cloud with relatively low A Vin order to determine the background star and galaxy counts. The area of combined IRACMIPS coverage of these ocloud regions however was relativel y small and so these observations are not discussed further in this paper. As detailed below w e have used the much larger and deeper SWIRE Surace et al. survey to understand th e characteristics of the most serious background contaminants in our maps the extragal actic objects. . YSO Selection Paper I described a process for classifying infrared object s into several categories those whose energy distributions could be welltted as reddened stellar photospheres those that had a high likelihood of being background galaxies and thos e that were viable YSO candi Fig. . Three color image of the area mapped in Serpens. The c olor mapping is blue. m green. m and red m. The locations of Cluster A Core Cluster Cluster B Serpens GG Cluster and VV Ser are indicated. dates. We have rened this process by combining MIPS and IRAC data together as well as by producing an improved comparison catalog from the SWIRE Surace et al. survey trimmed as accurately as possible to the cd sensitivity lim its. As shown by the number counts versus Wainscoat models of the Galactic background t oward Serpens in paper I nearly all the sources observed in our survey are likely to be background stars. Because of the high sensitivity of IRAC channels and relative to both MASS and to IRAC channels and most of the more than sources extracted from o ur Serpens dataset do not have enough spectral coverage for any reliable classicati on algorithm. In particular only sources had enough spectral information from a combi nation of MASS and IRAC data to permit a test for consistency with a stellar photosph ereplusextinction model and nearly of these objects were classied as reddened st ellar photospheres. These normal stellar objects are not considered further in our discussio n and are not plotted on the various color and magnitude diagrams. The details of this classica tion process and the criteria for tting are described in detail by Evans et al. . In order to pursue the classication process for YSOs beyon d that described in Paper I we added one more step to the data processing described the re. This nal step was bandlling the catalog to obtain upper limits or low SN d etections of objects that were not found in the original source extraction processing. Thi s step is described in detail in the delivery documentation for the nal cd data delivery Evans et al. . In short though it involved xing the position of the source during a n extraction at the position of an existing catalog source and tting the image data at that xe d position for two parameters a background level and source ux assuming it was a point sou rce. For this processing step the uxes of all the originally extracted sources were subtr acted from the image rst. In the case of the data discussed in this paper the most important c ontribution of this bandlling step is to give us ux estimates for the YSO candidates and ext ragalactic candidates at m. Because our knowledge of the true PSF is imperfect and beca use the m PSF is so much larger than the IRAC ones it was also necessary to exa mine these results carefully to be sure a bandlled m ux was not simply the poorly subtracted wings of a nearby bright source that in fact completely masked the source be ing bandlled. For the purposes of this paper all upper limits are given as values. Three of the sources eventually selected as YSOs by the proc ess described below had m uxes that were obviously saturated. These are the objects in Table numbered and . For these three objects we derived the m ux from a t to the wings of the source proles rather than a t to the whole prole as is done by the standard cd source extraction. .. Constructing a Control Catalog from Deep Extragalacti c SWIRE Observations We use the IRAC and MIPS images of the ELAIS N eld obtained by the SWIRE team as a control eld for understanding the extragalactic popul ation with colors that mimic those of YSOs present in our Serpens eld. This SWIRE eld expecte d to contain no extinction from a molecular cloud and no YSOs has coverage by both IRAC a nd MIPS of . deg and has a limiting ux roughly a factor of four below that of ou r observations of Serpens. The analysis described below is designed to produce a resamp led version of the SWIRE eld as it would have been observed with the typical cd sensitivi ty and as if it were located behind a molecular cloud with the range of extinctions obser ved in Serpens. The process of simulating these eects is discussed in detail in the nal c d data delivery documentation Evans et al. but the steps are summarized here. To avoid eects that may result from dierences in data proce ssing the BCD images for this SWIRE eld were processed by our pipeline in exactly the same way as our own obser vations. Once a bandmerged catalog of SWIRE sources was cons tructed we rst simulated the reddening of sources that would occur if Serpens had been in the foreground of this eld. This reddening was accomplished by randomly applying extin ction to each SWIRE source according to the extinction prole of Serpens shown in Figu re . For example of SWIRE sources were randomly selected and visual extinction s in the range . AV. were applied of sources were extincted by extinctions in the range . AV. and so forth. The extinctions were applied to each of the infr ared bands according to the extinction law appropriate for molecular clouds and cores Huard et al. in prep.. Second we degraded the sensitivity of the reddened SWIRE ph otometry to match that of our Serpens observations. This was accomplished by match ing the detection rates as a function of magnitude in each of the bands. The completen ess limits of the Serpens observations are approximately . . . . . . . and . mag at J H K . . . . and respectively. Thus for each band all reddened SWIRE sources brighter than the completeness limit in Serpens wou ld be detectable by cdlike observations and are identied as such in the resampled SWIR E catalog. Most but not all sources fainter than the completeness limit will not be dete cted by cdlike observations. We randomly select which sources to identify as detections in a given band in such as way as to reproduce the empirically determined shape of the complete ness function. This resampling process is performed for each band resulting in those sourc es fainter than the completeness limits in some bands being detected or not detected with the s ame probabilities as those for similar sources in Serpens. The photometric uncertainties of all sources in the resampled catalog of reddened SWIRE sources are reassigned uncertai nties similar to those of Serpens sources with similar magnitudes. Finally each source in the resampled SWIRE catalog is recl assied based on its de graded photometry e.g. star YSOc GALc .... The ma gnitudes colors and classi cations of sources in this resampled SWIRE catalog are then directly comparable to those in our Serpens catalog and may be used to estimate the populat ion of extragalactic sources satisfying various color and magnitude criteria. At this le vel of the classication the terms YSOc and GALc imply candidate classication status. .. Classication Based on Color and Magnitude In Paper I we described a simple set of criteria that basicall y categorized all objects that were faint and red in several combinations of IRAC and MIPS co lors as likely to be galaxies after removal of normal reddened stars. In our new classi cation we have extended this concept to include the color and magnitude spaces in Figure together with several additional criteria to compute a proxy for the probability that a source is a YSO or a background galaxy. Figure shows a collection of three colormagnitude diagra ms and one colorcolor diagram used to classify the sources found in our . to m survey of the Serpens Cloud that had SN in all the Spitzer bands between and m and that were not classied as reddened stellar photospheres. In addition to the Serpens s ources shown in the left panels the comparable set of sources from the fullsensitivity SWI RE catalog are shown in the center panels and the sources remaining in the extincteds ensitivityresampled version of the SWIRE catalog described above are shown in the right pane ls. The exact details of our classication scheme are described in Appendix A. Basic ally we form the product of individual probabilities from each of the three colormagn itude diagrams in Figure and then use additional factors to modify that total probabili ty based on source properties such as its K . color whether it was found to be extende d in either of the shorter IRAC bands and whether its ux density is above or below some empirically determined limits in several critical bands. Table summarizes the cri teria used for this class separation. The cutos in each of the colormagnitude diagrams and the n al probability threshold to separate YSOs from extragalactic objects were chosen to provide a nearly complete elimination of all SWIRE objects from the YSO class and t o maximize the number of YSOs selected in Serpens consistent with visual inspect ion of the images to eliminate obvious extragalactic objects such as a previously uncata logued obvious spiral galaxy at RA h m .s Dec J . The cutos in colormagnitude space were constructed as smo oth exponentially de caying probabilities around the dashed lines in each of the t hree diagrams. Sources far Fig. . The distribution of visual extinctions found towar d the roughly sources classied as stars in our Serpens observations. below the lines were assigned a high probability of being ext ragalactic contamination with a smoothly decreasing probability to low levels well above t he lines. In the case of the versus . relation the probability dropped o rad ially away from the center of the elliptical segment shown in the gure. After inclusion of th ese three colormagnitude criteria we added the additional criteria listed in Table . These inc luded a factor dependent on the K . color Prob K. to reect the higher probability of a source being an extragalactic GALc contaminant if it is bluer in that col or a higher GALc probability for sources that are extended at either . or . m where our survey had the best sensitivity and highest spatial resolution a decrease in GALc proba bility for sources with a m ux density above mJy empirically determined from exam ination of the SWIRE data and identication as extragalactic for anysource fainter than .. Again we emphasize that these criteria are based only on the empirica l approach of trying to charac terize the SWIRE population in colormagnitude space as pre cisely as possible not on any kind of modeling of the energy distributions. Figure graphically shows the division between YSOs and li kely extragalactic contam inants. The number counts versus our probability are show n for both the Serpens cloud and for the resampled SWIRE catalog normalized to the Serpe ns area. This illustrates how cleanly the objects in the SWIRE catalog are identied by this probability criterion. In the Serpens sample there are clearly two wellseparated g roups of objects plus a tail of intermediate probability objects that we have mostly class ied as YSOs since no such tail is apparent in the SWIRE sample. Our choice of the exact cut between YSO and XGal in Figure is somewhat ar bitrary because of the low level tail of objects in Serpens in the area of logprobability .. Since the area of sky included in our SWIRE sample is mor e than six times as large as the mapped area of Serpens we chose our nal probability cut logP . to allow two objects from the full not resampled SWIRE catalo g into the YSO classica tion bin. Thus aside from the vagaries of smallnumber stat istics we expect of order extragalactic interlopers in our list of Serpens YSOs. The right panels in Figure which use the resampled version of the SWIRE catalog show that the eects of sensitivity and especially the extinction in Serpens make our cuto limits particularly conservative in terms of likelihood of misclassication. We examined all the YSO c andidates chosen with these criteria both in terms of the quality of the photometry and th eir appearance in the images. A signicant number candidates were discarded because of the poor quality of t he bandlling process at m due to contamination by a nearby brighter source or because of their appearance in the images. It is possible that a small number of these discarded candidates are in fact true YSOs in the Serpens Cloud. We a lso manually classied one source as YSO in Table that may be the exciting sourc e for an HHlike outow in Cluster B see also discussion of this region by Harvey et al. but which was not so classied because of its extended structure in the IRAC band s. Table lists the YSOs that resulted from this selection process. Another test of the success of our separation of background c ontaminants is to simply plot the locations of the YSOs and likely galaxies on the sky . Figure shows such a plot in addition to a plot of visual extinction discussed later. T here is clearly a very uniform distribution of background contaminants and a quite cluste red distribution of YSOs see further discussion in . There is one additional kind of contaminant that is likely to appear in our data at a relatively low level AGB stars. The ISO observations by fo r example van Loon et al. and Trams et al. show that the range of brightnesses of AGB stars in the LMC covers a span equivalent roughly to . with colors generally equivalent to ... Very compact protoplanetary nebulae are generally redder but even brighter at m see e.g. Hora et al. . For typical galactic AGB stars betwe en and kpc from the sun this would imply .. The ocloud elds when normalized to the same area as the Serpens data provide the best handle on the degree of con tamination from AGB stars in Paper I we saw one object classied as a YSO candidate in the ocloud panel of Figure with . . Therefore based on the ratio of areas mapped in Serpens ve rsus the ocloud observations we expect the number of AGB stars contaminati ng the YSO candidate list in the Serpens cloud to be of order a half dozen. As a further chec k we have examined the entire set of ocloud elds for such objects. In this combin ed area of . deg there are only such YSO candidates. Finally Mer n et al. hav e classied four AGB stars by their SpitzerIRS spectra in the Serpens cloud these are id entied in the diagrams of Figure by black open diamonds and obviously are not included in our nal list of highprobability YSOs. Statistically then it is possible that a couple of ou r brightest YSOs are in fact AGB stars. In fact Mer n et al. have obtained modest SN optical spectra of a number of our YSOs. They nd ve objects whose estimated extinction s eems inconsistent with their location in the Serpens cloud and which suggests they might b e background objects at much larger distances with modest circumstellar shells like AGB stars. We have indicated these ve objects in Table with a footnote b. It is also interesting to ask the reverse question to what ex tent have our criteria suc cessfully selected objects that were known YSOs from previ ous observations. Alcal a et al. have used the same criteria to search for YSOs in the c d data for Chamaeleon II. They conclude that all but one of the known YSOs in that re gion are identied. In we discuss the comparison of our results with several previ ous studies of Serpens that searched for YSOs. Our survey found counterparts to all the previously known objects in Fig. . Colormagnitude and colorcolor diagrams for the S erpens Cloud left full SWIRE center and trimmed SWIRE regions. The black dashed lines show the fuzzy color magnitude cuts that dene the YSO candidate criterion in the various colormagnitude spaces. The red dashed lines show hard limits fainter than w hich objects are excluded from the YSO category. Fig. . Plot of the number of sources versus probability of being a background contami nant for the Serpens cloud and for the trimmed SWIRE catalog described in the text. The vertical dashed line shows the separation chosen for YSOs v ersus extragalactic candidates. For both samples only sources with detections in all four IR AC bands are plotted to keep the number counts of contaminants on scale Fig. . Left panel image of the entire mapped area of Serpen s at . m with the positions of YSOs plotted with circles and likely extragalactic bac kground contaminants with aster isks center panel same image with YSOs of luminosity L Lplotted with boxes and higher luminosity YSOs plotted with circles right pan el contours of visual extinction Avat levels of magnitudes as derived from tting th e energy distributions of sources that were wellt as reddened stellar photospheres in our data set. our observed area that had SN in those studies but we did not classify many of them as YSOs because of the lack of signicant excess in the IRAC o r MIPS bands. Most of these were indeed suggested only as candidate YSOs by the au thors so we do not consider this fact to be a problem for our selection criteria. We again emphasize the fact that our selection criteria for youth are based solely on the presenc e of an infrared excess at some Spitzer wavelength. The total number of objects classied as YSOs in the IRACMI PS overlap area of the Serpens cloud is . From the statistics of our classicati on of the SWIRE data we expect of order of these are likely to be galaxies. On the other hand as we di scuss in some of the faint red objects in Figure below the dashed lin e may also be young sub stellar objects. For example we note the case of the young br own dwarf BDSer found by Lodieu et al. that was not selected by our criteria bec ause of its relative faintness. Of these were detected in at least the H and K sbands of the MASS survey at better than . The number of YSOs in each of the four classes of the system s uggested by Lada and extended by Greene et al. is Class I C lass Flat Class II and Class III using the ux densities available between and m. Because we require some infrared excess to be identied as a YSO the Class III ca ndidates were necessarily selected by some measurable excess typically at the longer w avelengths or m. An obvious corollary is that objects identied as young on the b asis of other indicators e.g. Xray emission lithium abundance but without excesses in the range of m are not selected with our criteria. .. YSOs Selected By MIPS Harvey et al. found YSO candidates in the entire ar ea mapped by MIPS at m in Serpens an area of . deg of these are outside the IRACMIPS overlap area and are listed in Table . We can make a comparison of thos e statistics with the YSO counts here in two ways. First in the area covered by both IRAC and MIPS there are objects that satisfy the criteria of Harvey et al. i.e. K s K s and m SN . Of these satisfy our more restrictive criteria in thi s study based on the combination of MASS IRAC and MIPS data or . We would classify the other as likely background galaxies. Secondly of the YSOs found in this study have sucient data to be classiable by the mips only crite ria above but only or actually meet the mipsonly YSO criteria. In other words objects have been classied as high quality YSOs in this paper in the MIPSIRAC overlap r egion that did not meet the criteria based only on MIPS and MASS data. If these ratio s can be extrapolated to the larger area covered only by MIPS then we would expect Har vey et al. to have missed or of the YSOs but to have included or t hat would not meet our combined IRACMIPS criteria. With these corrections we might have expected to nd YSOs in the entire . degarea covered by MIPS if we had matching IRAC observations. Finally in light of our earlier discussion o f AGB contaminants it is possible that of these YSOs would actually be found to be backgrou nd AGB stars. . Search for Variability The fact that our data were taken in two epochs separated by h ours or more gives us the opportunity to search for variability over that time s cale. Rebull et al. and Harvey et al. have performed similar tests for variab ility of the m emission from sources in the cd observations of Perseus and Serpens and fo und no reliable evidence for variability at that wavelength. There is however substan tial evidence for short term vari ability in the nearinfrared for YSOs. We therefore perf ormed a similar investigation in the two shortest IRAC bands . and . m. No clear evidence was found at the level of for any sources in the eld over the hour time scale of ou r multiepoch observations. . Comparison with Previous Studies of Serpens We have crosscorrelated our source catalog with those from previous studies of Serpens that searched for YSOs. We chose three studies that covered much of Cluster A at both near IR ISO and Xray wavelengths Eiroa Casali Kaas et a l. Preibisch and one recent ISO study of Cluster B Djupvik et al. . Table lists the sources from each of these previous studies and the bestmatching Spitzer sou rce from our complete catalog. In brief we nd good matches for essentially all the previou s IRselected YSOs that had SN in the earlier studies and which were included in our mapped area. In detail however a number of YSO candidates from the earlier studies were not classied as YSOs in our study. The reasons for this are dierent for the variou s catalogs. From the Xray catalog of Preibisch Preibisch in Cluster A we only i dentied of the Xray sources as YSOs on the basis of their infrared excesses. The Xray sources that were not identied as YSOs included both many objects that were well tted as reddened stellar photospheres sources and objects with some likely infr ared excess but too little to t our criteria aimed at eliminating extragalactic interlop ers. The situation with the infrared catalogs is somewhat dierent. Examining our nonmatches f rom the groundbased study of Eiroa Casali we nd that a large fraction of their YS Os are classied as such by our criteria but not all. From the ISO surveys Kaas et al. Djupvik et al. we typically identify as YSOs. The ones that we do not classify as such are ty pically those with low SN in the ISO observations or where the amount of infrared excess was not large enough to satisfy our test of whether the object could n ot be tted as an extincted stellar photosphere as described by Evans et al. . . Luminosities .. The YSO Luminosity Function in Serpens One of the most important physical parameters for any star is its mass. For pre mainsequence stars this is problematic because the deter mination of mass depends on the placement of the star on an HR diagram andthe use of model evolutionary tracks for which there is signicant uncertainty at the level of at least a fac tor of . in the literature Hillenbrand White Stassun et al. . For young st ars in a cluster a poor but still useful proxy for mass is the stellar luminosity since i t is possible that most of the stars have formed more or less simultaneously. With all these cave ats in mind we display in Figure the histogram of total luminosities for the YSOs found in Serpens in our survey with the assumed distance of pc. We remind the reader that thes e objects were selected specically on the basis of infrared excess emission so thi s list is limited to YSOs that show substantial IR excess at least somewhere in the range of . m. For example as we discussed in a comparison of our list of YSOs with the list of Xray sour ces in Cluster A Preibisch showed that more than half the Xray source s were not classied as YSOs by our infrared excess criteria. In some sense then it is lik ely that the IRselected and x rayselected samples are complementary in selecting less evolved and moreevolved samples of YSOs respectively. The luminosity function of our IRex cessdened YSO sample peaks at roughly Land drops o steeply below L. This is interestingly equal to the luminosity of objects at the hydrogenburning limit o f . M in the models of Barae et al. for objects with ages of Myr a common estimate for the age of the Serpens star forming event Kaas et al. Djupvik et al. . Of course an important question to ask is to what extent this luminosity distributi on in Figure is inuenced by selection eects. We can estimate the selection eects in our sample from the st atistics in the SWIRE samples discussed above. The completeness limits of the ful l catalog are nearly magnitudes fainter than the trimmed version so we assume for simplicit y that the full catalog is complete down to the faintest magnitudes of interest for thi s test in the cd Serpens data set. Figure shows the number counts as a function of lumino sity all sources assumed to be at pc for three versions of our cdprocessed SWIRE catalog the fulldepth catalog the catalog cuto with cd sensitivity limits b ut without added extinction and the catalog corrected for both cd sensitivity levels and extinction in the Serpens cloud. The ratio of the second to the rst version serves as a good pro xy for a completeness function since it includes the eects of cd sensitivity only. The low er panel of Figure then shows this ratio as our estimate of the completeness function at th e range of luminosities of Serpens YSOs observed in Figure . In Figure then we also indicat e how the YSO luminosity function might be adjusted to account for this estimate of ou r survey completeness with an assumed completeness of at the bright end. Although su bstantial adjustments must be made to the number counts at fainter luminosities the gen eral conclusion remains intact that the luminosity function peaks around fewLand drops to both lower and higher luminosities. Interestingly if our completeness e stimates are valid there may still be a substantial population of IR excess sources down to lumino sities of Las was already suggested in Paper I. For example as noted earlier in . the young brown dwarf found by Lodieu et al. was not selected as a YSO with our criteri a because it was faint enough that its colors placed it into the color and magnitude ranges where extragalactic objects begin to be prominent. .. The Lowest Luminosity Sources There are YSOs with total luminosities m less than L without any correction for selection eects in either our observati ons or our selection criteria. Figure presented in . shows the spatial distribution of the low L L and high LL luminosity YSOs in Serpens. There does not appear to be any signicant dierence between these two distributions. Likewise Figur e shows the distribution of spec tral slopes for the low luminosity sample relative to two higher lumino sity samples and Table lists the average and standard deviation for the spec tral slopes for three luminos ity samples. Again there is no obvious dierence in the dist ributions within the statistical uncertainties of the samples. See also discussion in .. These two facts suggest that the mechanisms and timing of formation of these two luminosi ty groups may not be very dierent. Finally Figure shows the distribution of extin ction for stars nearby each YSO. For this analysis we selected all objects within of each Y SO that were classied as star by the process described earlier. We averaged the tted exti nction values for these stars the number of stars contributing to the average ranged from to . This gure shows that the lower luminosity YSOs have at least as much typical exti nction as the higher luminos ity ones a fact that would be unlikely if they were misclass ied background extragalactic objects. Fig. . Luminosity function for Serpens YSOs solid and e stimate of correction for completeness eects dashed. Fig. . Upper panel number counts for the full SWIRE catalo g as processed through the cd pipeline for objects detected in all four IRAC bands v ersus those for the trimmed version of the catalog with completeness limits for each ind ividual band comparable to those for cd. Lower panel the ratio of the two number counts i.e. completeness factor. Fig. . Histogram of distribution of spectral slopes alp ha for three luminosity classes of YSOs. Fig. . Histogram of distribution of average extinction fo r stars within of each YSO for high and low luminosity YSOs above or below L. . Spatial Distribution of Star Formation We have already noted in that the Serpens starforming region has been identied as one displaying strong evidence of clustering of the young est objects. We also showed in Figure that the spatial distribution of our high quality YSO candidates was highly clustered. A number of authors have attempted to quantify th e degree of clustering as a function of spatial scale using the twopoint correlation function Johnstone et al. Enoch et al. Simon Gomez Lada Bate Clarke McCaughrean . Typical results have found a steep slope don small spatial scales implying a rapid decrease in clustering on scales out to AU and a substantially shallower slope d.beyond that Simon Gomez Lada . Figure shows t he twopoint correlation function W for the YSOs in our Serpens catalog and the sample of object s classied as extragalactic background sources. The Serpe ns samples are divided into two groups those with spectral slopes that place them in the Class I or Flat categories of Greene et al. and those whose slopes imply Class II or III. Although our range of good sampling only extends down to AU equivalent to our data suggest that the slope for separations under AU is of order . and drops steeply for the more embedded and likely youngest Class I and FlatSED objects be yond AU. The nominally more evolved objects in Class II and III exhibit a lower leve l of clustering and more uniform slope in the twopoint correlation function. These results are consistent with the appearance of the source distributions as shown for example in Figure of Paper I. As shown in Figure the slope and magnitude of the correlation for our sample of background extra galactic objects is consistent with that found by for examp le Maddox et al. for a bright sample of galaxies. The total surface density of young stellar objects in a clust er is an indicator of the richness of star formation in the cluster. Allen et al. have computed surface densities for YSOs identied by infrared excess in a sample of young clusters. They nd typical peak surface densities of pcand average values of order pc. The peak surface density in Cluster A of our YSOs identied by IR excess is comparable to these of order pc and a factor of about two less in Cluster B. The average value s are about a factor of less than the peak in both clusters. In particular if we dene the cluster edges by theAv contour for comparison with other cd clusters we obtai n the values in Table for the number of stars per solid angle and per square parsec. We have compared the values for clusters A and B with those for the rest of the cloud and for the total cloud surveyed. The surface densities of YSOs are to times higher in the c lusters as in the rest of the cloud. As shown by Allen et al. Cluster A in Serpens is particularly striking in terms of the contrast between the peak surface density and how quic kly within pc the density drops to very low values fewpc. In terms of volume density though even Cluster A has a substantially lower volume density of star formation than such rich clusters as the Trapezium pc or Mon R pc Elmegreen et al. . Figure also shows the spatial distribution of visual extin ction in the cloud as derived from our data. These extinction values were derived from the combination of MASS and Spitzer data for sources that were well t as reddened stella r photospheres as described in detail by Evans et al. . As already noted in our previou s studies of the IRAC data alone Harvey et. al. and the MIPS data alone Harvey et al. there is clearly a striking correspondence between the areas of high extinct ion and the densest clusters of YSOs particularly those containing Class I and Class Flat sources. . Disk Properties The properties of the circumstellar dust surrounding young stars can be estimated from the overall energy distributions of the objects in a variety of ways. These properties include the overall amount of dust the density distribution as a fun ction of radial distance from the central star the morphology of the circumstellar disks which probably represent the conguration of many of these circumstellar distributions and to some extent the degree of evolution of the dust from typical interstellar dust to la rger and more chemically evolved grains likely to represent some stage in the formation of pla netary systems. We discuss several approaches to classifying the dust emission in this section beginning with the use of infrared colors. .. Colorcolor diagrams Numerous authors have shown how combinations of colors in th e infrared can provide signicant diagnostic information on the conguration and total amount of circumstellar material around young stars. Whitney et al. modelled a wide range of disk and envelope congurations and computed their appearance in a n umber of infrared colorcolor and colormagnitude diagrams particularly relevant to Spi tzers wavelength range. Similarly Allen et al. have published IRAC colorcolor diagram s for another set of models of objects with circumstellar disks andor envelopes. Recent ly Robitaille et al. have computed a very large grid of models to extend the prediction s from those of Whitney et al. to a much larger parameter space. Observationally L ada et al. have used IRAC and MIPS colors from Spitzer observations to classify t he optical thickness of disks around premainsequence stars in IC using the terms a nemic disks and thick disks Fig. . Left panel the twopoint correlation function W for Serpens. The dotted histogram is for sources identied as Class I and Flat SED o bjects i.e. .. The solid histogram is for the Class IIIII objects i.e. .. The dashed lines show several possible power law slopes for the portions of the YSO curves. Right panel the dashed histogram is for the objects classied as likely background galaxies with SN in all four IRAC bands. The dashdot line shows the slope and amplitude f ound by Maddox et al. for the bright end of the extragalactic population which is a quite good t to our estimate of the background contamination in our sample. to point to objects roughly in the Class III and Class II porti ons of the ubiquitous Class System Lada Greene et al. . Figure shows three colorcolor diagrams and one colorma gnitude diagram for the Serpens YSOs compared to the density of models from Robi taille et al. for a model cluster at the distance of Serpens with brightnesses l imited to those appropriate for our sensitivity levels. For two of the diagrams the gure als o indicates the approximate areas where most of the models fall for the three physical sta ges I II and III described by Robitaille et al. that roughly correspond to the ob servational classes IFlat II and III. These diagrams display rst of all that YSOs c ome in a wide range of colors and brightnesses large areas of all the diagrams are occupi ed. In a general way we nd objects located in these diagrams where the models of Whitne y et al. Allen et al. and Robitaille et al. would predict for prem ainsequence stars with a range of evolutionary states as well as general agreement with the locations of young objects found in IC by Lada et al. . For example consistent with o ur nding in paper I that the bulk of the YSOs are class II objects we see a strong concent ration in the area around . . . ... where both Allen et al. and Whit ney et al. predict such sources should be located. Additionally there is structure in the . vs. .. color magnitude diagram for the distribution of Serpens YSOs that is also ev ident in the density of models of Robitaille et al. . There are however some intere sting dierences. The Stage II area from Robitaille et al. includes a smaller fracti on of our nominal Class II objects than might be expected. There is also a larger number of very r ed objects in several of the diagrams than is predicted by the density of models in those a reas considering that the faintest grey levels correspond to a probability equal to of the maximum probability. Some of this may be due to eects of reddening but it suggests that the models may also need some renement despite their rough agreement with the distribution of observed colors. These data can also be examined to see if there is any correlat ion between luminosity and infrared excess e.g. the . vs. .. color ma gnitude diagram. For example if higher luminosity young objects had higher levels of multip licity e.g. Lada then it is possible this would be manifested in less massive disks with perhaps large inner holes. Figure shows no such correlation in fact if anything there appe ars to be a lack of relatively blue colors for the brightest objects. Figure that displays the distribution of spectral slopes and the accompanying Table also show no measurable eect withi n the scatter for a dependence of spectral slope on luminosity. Fig. . Colorcolor and colormagnitude plots of the S erpens YSOs compared with the distributions from models of Robitaille et al. . T he symbols are for the three dierent luminosity groups discussed in the text open diam onds L L light lled circles . L L L plus signs L . L . The model data were those for their model cluster with a distance of pc for Serpens and with t he cd completeness limits. Also shown are the rough areas from Robitaille et al. o ccupied by mainly stage I II and III models. .. Spectral Energy Distribution Modeling In order to go beyond the general conclusions possible from c olorcolor and color magnitude plots we have modelled the large fraction of our s ources for which enough data are available to characterize them as likely starplusdis k objects. For this analysis we have selected all Class II and Class III YSOs. We expect these obj ects to have a reddened photo sphere plus an infrared excess coming from the circumstella r material most likely in a disk conguration. For completeness we show without modeling the SEDs of the remaining YSOs. Figures to show the SEDs of all Class I Class Flat Class II and Class III sources. The open dots are the observed uxes and generally i nclude MASS J H and K uxes followed by the four IRAC uxes at . . . and . m and by the MIPS uxes at and m when available. For the Class IIs and IIIs we characterize the emission from the disk by comparing the energy distribution with that of a lowmass star. For this we have computed the extinction from the JK colors assuming a K underlying star and then we have dereddened the observed uxes with the interstellar extinction law of Weingartner Draine with R v . to t the dereddened SEDs to a NEXTGEN Hauschildt et al. model of a K stellar photosphere. I n the plots the lled dots are the dereddened uxes and the grey line is the photospheric em ission from the star. Each SED is labeled with the identication number in Table . The p arameters of the model ts are listed in Tables and . Two main assumptions are used in this approach. The rst is th at the star is a lowmass star this is reasonable given the fact that the luminosity f unction discussed earlier peaks at LfewL. In addition Oliveira et al. have found that of the YSOs they observed out of our sample had spectral types of K or M. Th e second assumption is that there is no substantial excess in the near infrared band s where we consider all ux to be photospheric. This assumption is obviously only correct for those stars in the sample without strong ongoing disk accretion. Cieza et al. have demonstrated that near IR excesses as short as Jband can be seen in some actively acc reting T Tauri stars and they give an observed range of Jband excesses of . . mag for their sample of sources in Taurus. The eect of this excess on the computed parameter s implies that the stellar luminosities for the Class II objects are upper limits and th erefore the disk luminosities are lower limits. More specically neglecting an excess ux in the Jband of . magnitude in one object would reduce its LdiskLstar ratio by and modi fy the disk emission SED diminishing its excess mostly at the shorter wavelengths. T hat would only happen however to the fraction of objects that are strongly accreting. Oliv eira et al. found strong Hemission indicative of active accretion in only out of S erpens YSOs observed. We ran a test removing these objects from the nal statistics an d this did not change the overall picture. The dashed line in the SED plots is the median SED of T Tauri sta rs in Taurus Hartmann et al. normalized to the dereddened Jband ux of our SEDs. It repre sents the typical SED of an optically thick accreting disk ar ound a Classical T Tauri star and is shown here to allow a qualitative estimation of the pre sence of disk evolution and dust settling. Based on similarity to this median SED we de ne as Tan SED which is identical to it within the errors as L an SED with lower uxes at some wavelengths and H an object with larger uxes than the median T Tauri SED. We hav e labeled the objects with these codes and use them to interpret the state of disk evolut ion. We interpret the Ltype objects as thin disks which could perhaps result from dust gr ain growth and settling to the midplane similar to the anemic disks in Lada et al. . Objects and are good examples of Ttype objects numbers and are Ltype star s and number is a Htype object. Also we have labeled as LUobjects that have photospheric uxes up to around m but then a sudden jump at longer wavelengths to the levels of a TTauri disk. We believe these objects may have large inner holes in their still optic ally thick disks number is one example of these. Out of the sources in the sample that are Class II or Class I II are T type so equivalent to a classical T Tauri star are Ltype so show evidence of some degree of disk evolution and nally show large r uxes than the median SED of Taurus. This latter category is generally the result o f imperfect tting to the stellar photosphere due to lack of nearIR data and will not be consid ered further. The numbers above indicate that there are many young stars in Serpens with disks that are virtually identical to those in Taurus. This points to a very similar origin of the disk structure across star forming regions. Within the unce rtainties in our modeling process discussed above however we see a majority of Ltype object s in Serpens. This suggests that the disks in Serpens may be generally more evol ved or attened that those in Taurus. Also interestingly the number of LUtype objects or those with large inner holes amounts to of the Ltype objects and only of the tota l YSO sample including Class I and F sources. This very small incidence indicates t hat either the process producing these large inner holes is a very fast transitional phase in t he disk evolution or that only a small number of systems undergo that phase. We examine this issue below. In order to put rmer limits on these numbers it will be necessary to get o ptical spectral types for the stars and optical photometry in order to produce more accura te photospherediskextinction models. The SEDs also allow a rough study of the disk properties acros s the surveyed area. For this purpose we integrated the stellar and total uxes to cal culate a ratio between the stellar and the disk uxes. The corresponding distribution is shown in Figure . Again the solid line is the whole Class II and III sample and the dotted line co rresponds to the Ttype SEDs. To guide the eye we have marked the approximate regimes of th ese ratios measured in debris disks LdiskLstar . passive disks . LdiskLstar . Kenyon Hartmann and accretion disks LdiskLstar . respectively. The gure illustrates well the large variety of disk evolutionary phases that we observe in Serpens as well as the large majority of massive accreting disks in the region. In order to study the disk evolution in the cloud there is nee d for a better charac terization of the full sample with optical spectroscopy. Th at work is in progress and will be published elsewhere. Here we explore further the shapes o f the SEDs to test another evolutionary diagnostic of the disk status. We have found th at the more commonly used evolutionary metrics e.g. spectral slope bolometric temperature Tbol or the Class sys tem discussed earlier do not seem to capture the full range of phenomena apparent in our distribution of SEDs for young stellar objects. We theref ore use excessandexcess two newsecondorder SED parameters presented in Cieza et al. that will be d iscussed in more detail in a separate paper. In short excessis the last wavelength where the observed ux is photospheric and excessis the slope computed as dlogFdlog starting from excess. The rst parameter gives us an indication of how close the ci rcumstellar matter is to the central object and the latter one a measure of how optic ally thick it is. Given the assumptions above for the tting process our values are upp er limits for excess and corre spondingly lower limits for excessfor the Class IIs. We assume good stellar ts for the Class III sources. Figure shows both values for a sample of Classical T Tauri s tars CTTs from Cieza et al. weaklined T Tauri stars wTTs from Cie za et al. debris disks from Chen et al. and our sample of YSOs in Serpens. Cie za et al. found that excessis well correlated with evolutionary phase and also as seen in Figure that is observed over wider ranges for later evolutionary phases. T his suggests a large range of possible evolutionary paths for circumstellar disks. Obje cts could either evolve to the lower right side of the diagram which could be interpreted as a sig n of dust grain growth and settling to the disk midplane they could also move to the ri ght and up from creation of a large inner hole in their disks while retaining a massive out er disk and also as this diagram shows all intermediate pathways in between both extremes. Fig. . Spectral Energy Distributions of the Class I sourc es in the sample. The open dots signal the observed uxes from Jband to MIPS when av ailable. The label gives the index in Table . Fig. . Spectral Energy Distributions of the Class I sourc es in the sample continued. Symbols as in Figure . Fig. . Spectral Energy Distributions of the Flat sources in the sample. Symbols as in Figure . Fig. . Spectral Energy Distributions SED of the Class I I sources in the sample. The open and solid dots are the observed and dereddened uxes res pectively. The grey line is the stellar model of a K star and the dashed line is the median SED of the TTauri stars in Taurus by Hartmann et al. normalized to the dereddene d Jband ux for comparison. See text for more information. Fig. . Spectral Energy Distributions of the Class II sour ces in the sample continued. Fig. . Spectral Energy Distributions of the Class II sour ces in the sample continued. Fig. . Spectral Energy Distributions of the Class II sour ces in the sample continued. Fig. . Spectral Energy Distributions of the Class III sou rces in the sample. Fig. . Spectral Energy Distributions of the Class III sou rces in the sample. . Selected Sources .. The Coldest Objects Table lists the YSOs that display the coldest energy dis tributions. These are the objects whose ratio of FF. Six of these are in Cluster A the core and four in Cluster B. Two are in a small grouping about .northeast of Cluster B and the remaining three appear as isolated cold objects though in areas with o ther moderately red objects. All of these except for two of the isolated cold objects IDs and are associated with dense clumps of millimeter emission as seen by Enoch et a l. . As discussed in the following section two in Cluster A and one in Cluster B are as sociated with high velocity outows. As has been noted already by Padgett et al. an d Rebull et al. it is striking how many of these coldest most obscured YSOs are l ocated in compact clusters together with objects that are substantially more evolved i n the nominal system of classes e.g. Class II and III. .. Outow Sources A number of recent Spitzer studies have found that highvelo city shocked outows from young stars are visible in IRAC images typically strongest at .m NoreigaCrespo et al. . We have examined our images for such outows as well as for correspondance with the lists of published HH objects in the region Ziener Eisloe l . Table summarizes the results of this eort. Two strong obvious jetlike feat ures are seen in Cluster A and one in Cluster B. In addition as shown in Table we nd smal l extended features at the positions of most of the known HH objects in Serpens that were within our covered area. The two jets in Cluster A appear to originate from two of the mos t deeply embedded objects in this cluster that are associated with the submm sources SMM and SMM Testi Sargent . Both these outows are aligned roughly in the NWSE di rection and are visible on both sides of the central m likely exciting sources. In Cluster B there is one obvious jetlike feature extending mostly south of YSO . There is also probably faint emission visible to the north of the embedded source as well. Harvey et al. discuss the Cluster B jet and several nearby Spitzer sources in more deta il. Figures and show color images of Clusters A and B with the color tables chose n to make these jets most visible. In addition to the optical HH objects in the Serpens Clouds there are a number of highvelocity molecular outows that have been mapped in Cluster A Davis et al. . These maps present a confusing picture of outows and becau se of the relatively larger beamwidth of the mm observations and close packing of infrar ed sources in this cluster it is Fig. . Distribution of disk to star luminosity ratios. Th e solid and dashed lines are the total sample and T Taurilike sample of SEDs respectively. Also marked are the typical ranges of L diskLstarratios for debris disks passive irradiated disks and accre tion disks. The gure indicates that objects of all three evolutionary stag es are found in Serpens with a predominance of young accreting T Tauritype stars. Fig. . Distribution of excess slopes excesswith respect to the wavelength at which the infrared excess begins turnofor the sample of wTTs solid dots a sample of cTTs in Lupus from Cieza et al. the median SED of cTTs in Tauru s from DAlessio et al. in asterisks marked as D and a sample of debris di sks from Chen et al. in diamonds. The arrows represent the limits for the class II ob jects in Serpens and the triangles the Class III sources. The diagram shows a much larger spread in inner disk morphologies in the more evolved objects than in the least evolved ones. Th e Serpens objects follow the previously observed trend. very dicult to associate the radio outows unequivocally w ith particular Spitzer sources. .. Other Objects Horrobin Casali Eiroa reported on the disappearan ce of a bright nearinfrared source in Serpens from the earlier study of EC. Table show s that we also see no obvious source at the position of EC other than a low SN single band detection of a source moderately distant from the nominal position. Interesting ly though this area marked in Figure appears to contain several small knots of emission that may represent shocked gas. For example there are two small knots visible in our . and .m images that have no . or m counterparts and therefore not classied as YSOs. Thes e two knots at RA . Dec J are only south of the position of EC. Therefore it is possible that the original source was a small clump of ex cited gas that has moved or dissipated since the original study of EC and perhaps th ese Spitzer knots are related to that earlier source in some way. . Overall Results on Star Formation The overall picture of star formation in Serpens is summariz ed in Table . As noted earlier the surface density of young stars is much higher in Clusters A and B than in the rest of the cloud by factors of to . On the other hand the majority of YSOs arenotin the clusters but in the rest of the cloud. If we assume a mea n mass for the stars of . M and assume that star formation has been proceeding for Myr we can estimate the rate at which the clusters and the whole cloud are convert ing mass into stars. These values are also given in Table . The Serpens cloud that we hav e surveyed is turning nearly M into stars per Myr. The rates for the clusters are probably un derestimates because they are probably younger than Myr a typical duration for t he Class II SED. Of course a signicant number of the older objects outside the clusters may have in fact formed in these or earlier clusters. A km srandom motion of a YSO relative to its birthplace results in pc of movement in yr or nearly degree at the distance of Serpens. The distribution of YSOs over class supports the younger age for the clusters than for star formation in general in Serpens. While the ratio of the n umber of Class I and Flat spectrum sources to the number of Class II and Class III sourc es is . for the whole cloud similar to other clouds surveyed by cd Evans et al. in prep . the same ratio is . for Cluster A and . for Cluster B. These high ratios strongly su ggest that Cluster A is too Fig. . Threecolor image of the Cluster A area of Serpens. The color coding is blue. m green. m and red m. Some of the more obvious objects that are likely to be jets are marked by arrows. The region of the disappearin g source of Eiroa Casali is circled. Fig. . Threecolor image of the Cluster B area of Serpens a s for Figure . young for most YSOs to have reached the Class II stage. In cont rast this ratio is . for the rest of the cloud outside the clusters which is strongl y dominated by Class II and Class III objects. . Summary We have identied a highcondence set of YSOs in Serpen s by a set of criteria based on comparison with data from the Spitzer SWIRE Legacy p rogram. This is a large enough number that we can draw important statistical conclu sions about various properties of this set. If we assume that the Class System of Lada and Greene et al. represents an evolutionary sequence then the relative num bers of YSOs found in each of the rst three classes I at and II suggests that the Clas s II phase lasts substantially longer than the combined total of the Class I and Flat phase s based on the overall cloud statistics. The clusters however show more YSOs in the Cla ss I and Flat phases than in Class II indicating that they are very young. The majorit y of YSOs mostly Class II are outside the clusters and probably represent a somewhat o lder epoch of star formation compared to the intense star formation now going on in the clu sters. The surface density of YSOs in the clusters exceeds that of the rest of the cloud by fa ctors of to Table . The luminosity function for the Serpens YSOs is populated d own to luminosities of L. It may extend even lower but our ability to distinguish low luminosity YSOs is severely restricted by the large population of backgroun d galaxies at these ux levels. The lower luminosity YSOs L L exhibit a similar spatial distribution and SED slope distribution to those of their higher luminosity coun terparts. This is consistent with the conclusion that they have formed in similar ways. . Acknowledgments Support for this work part of the Spitzer Legacy Science Pro gram was provided by NASA through contracts and issue d by the Jet Propulsion Lab oratory California Institute of Technology under NASA co ntract . Astrochemistry in Leiden is supported by a NWO Spinoza grant and a NOVA grant. B. M. thanks the Fundaci on Ram on Areces for nancial support. This publication makes use of data products from the Two Micron All Sky Survey which is a joint project of the Univ ersity of Massachusetts and the Infrared Processing and Analysis CenterCaliforni a Institute of Technology funded by NASA and the National Science Foundation. We also acknowl edge extensive use of the SIMBAD data base. A. YSO Selection Process The procedure we use to select YSOs and deselect extragal actic background sources is based on the colormagnitude diagrams shown in Figure . W e construct probability functions for each of the three colormagnitude diagrams ba sed on where a source falls relative to the black dashed lines in each diagram. These three proba bilities are multiplied and then additional adjustments to the probability are made based on several additional properties of the source uxes and whether or not they were found to be lar ger than pointlike in the source extraction process. In the . vs. .. color magnitude diagram the pr obability function is Pii . exp. .M.D where D . for M.M.. . for .M.M.. and object was found to be pointlike in all IRAC bands . for .M.M.. and object was found to be extended at . or . m . forM.M.. In the vs. . color magnitude diagram the prob ability function is PimexpMM.. M andPimis set to a minimum of .. In the vs. .. color magnitude diagram the pro bability function is Pim . expM.M .M. andPimis set to a minimum of . The combined probability is then PtotPiiPimPim Additionally the following factors inuence modication s toPtot PtotK. Ptot for sources that are extended at . or . m Ptot . where i.e. assumed GALc Ptot. where F mJy and source detected at . and m Based on the distribution of Ptotshown in Figure we chose the dividing line between YSOs and extragalactic sources to be logPtot .. Table . YSO vs. XGal Discrimination Criteria Criterion Contaminant Probability K . Prob K. . for .. . Smooth increase for . . . for . .. . Extended Smooth increase for . . . for . .. . Pointlike Smooth increase for . . . for . .. Smooth increase for . . ... . Smooth increase for values .... Smooth increase for values for all colors probability for . Extended at . or . m Twice as likely to be Xgal F Xgal prob . for F mJy Table . YSOs in Serpens ID NamePosition Prev. Namea.m . m . m . m . m . m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy . . . . . . . . . . b . . b . . . . . . . . CDF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . CoKu SerG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . b D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued ID NamePosition Prev. Namea.m . m . m . m . m . m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy . . . . . . . . . . IRAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IRAS . . . . . . . . . . VV Ser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DD . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IRAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued ID NamePosition Prev. Namea.m . m . m . m . m . m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D D . . . . . . . . . . CoKu SerG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . CoKu SerG CoKu SerG . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IRAS . . . . . . IRAS . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . b . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued ID NamePosition Prev. Namea.m . m . m . m . m . m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IRAS . . D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IRAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IRAS . . . . . . . . . . b D . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued ID NamePosition Prev. Namea.m . m . m . m . m . m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IRAS . . . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K CDF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued ID NamePosition Prev. Namea.m . m . m . m . m . m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy K . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IRAS EC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . OO Ser . . . . V Ser . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ka . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued ID NamePosition Prev. Namea.m . m . m . m . m . m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy . . . . . . . . . . V Ser . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ETC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IRAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IRAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued ID NamePosition Prev. Namea.m . m . m . m . m . m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy IRAS . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . CoKu SerG . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . EC K . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . EC EC . . . . . . . . . . EC EC . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . HH . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued ID NamePosition Prev. Namea.m . m . m . m . m . m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . HH . . . . . . . . . . K . . K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . GCNM . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . EC EC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued ID NamePosition Prev. Namea.m . m . m . m . m . m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . aSource names from SIMBAD including numbers from the follow ing catalogs EC Eiroa Casali D Djupvik et al. K Kaas et al. . bMay be AGB star based on Avderived from optical spectrum. Table . YSO Candidates in Serpens Without Band IRAC Obser vations ID NamePosition Prev. Name . m . m . m . m . m . m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy .. .. .. IRAC .. IRAS .. .. IRAS IRAS .. IRAS IRAS . . .. .. IRAS . . . . .. .. .. . . .. .. .. . . IRAS .. .. .. . . Table Continued ID NamePosition Prev. Name . m . m . m . m . m . m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy .. .. .. . . . . GSC .. .. . . .. .. IRAS IRAS .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. HD .. .. .. .. .. .. Table Continued ID NamePosition Prev. Name . m . m . m . m . m . m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy .. .. .. Table . Matching Spitzer SourcesFluxes For Previously Id entied IR Sources In Serpens SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy D . . . . . . . . . D D . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . K .. D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . K .. K .. D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy D . . . . . . . . . K .. D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . K .. D . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . K .. D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy D . . . . . . . . . D D . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . K .. D . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . K .. K . . D . . . . . . . . . . D D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy D D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . D P . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy K . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . D . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . D . . K . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy K . . D . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . K . . . . K . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . . D D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy D . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . K D . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy D . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . K . . K . . . . K . . . . . . K . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . D . . . . . . . . . . P K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . P K . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy K . . . . . . . . . . K K EC . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . K . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . . K K . . . . . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . K EC . . . . Ka EC . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy Kb . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . P K EC . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . P K EC . . . . . . . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy K . . . . . . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . P K EC . . . . K . . P K . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . K EC EC . . . . . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . . P EC . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K EC . . P . . . . . . ECP K EC Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy P K EC . . . . . . . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . . P K EC K EC . . . . . . . . . . EC P K EC K . . . . . . . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . K EC . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . P K EC K . . K . . K . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . K EC . P K EC . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy P . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . K EC . . . . . . . . K EC EC . . . . . . . . P K EC . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . K . . . K . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . EC . . . . . . . . . . EC EC . . . . . . . . . P K . . . . . . . . . . P K . . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . P K . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . Table Continued SourceaSpitzer . m . m . m . m m m SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy K . . . . . . . . K . . . . K . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . P . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . K . . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . . P . . . . . . . aSource numbers from the following catalogs EC Eiroa Casa li D Djupvik et al. P Preibisch K Kaas et al. . Table . AverageStd Dev of Spectral Slope Versus Luminosity of YSOs Luminosity Range Average . L . . . . L . . . L . . Table . Numbers Densities Star Formation Rates Region Area NYSOs N NArea NVol SFR SFRArea pc deg pc pc M Myr M Myrpc Cluster A . Cluster B . . Rest of Cloud . . . . All of Cloud . . . . Table . Disk Modeling Results in Class II Sources Star SED Type A VLstar LdiskLstar turnoexcess L . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . LU . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . LU . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . Table Continued Star SED Type A VLstar LdiskLstar turnoexcess L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . LU . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . LU . . . . . LU . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . Table Continued Star SED Type A VLstar LdiskLstar turnoexcess L . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . LU . . . . . L . . . . . LU . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . Table Continued Star SED Type A VLstar LdiskLstar turnoexcess L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . LU . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . LU . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . LU . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . T . . . . . Table . Disk Modeling Results in Class III Sources Star SED Type A VLstar LdiskLstar turnoexcess L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . LU . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . LU . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . LU . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . Table Continued Star SED Type A VLstar LdiskLstar turnoexcess L . . . . . LU . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . L . . . . . Table . The Coldest YSOs FF ID NamePosition . m . m . m . m . m . m Tbl SSTcdJ... mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy mJy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table . Probable High Velocity Outows in Serpens YSO ID RA J Dec J Matching Name Comments . HH ABE . HH A . HH A . HH BD . HH AB . HH ABCD . HH AB . SMM Jets to NW and SE . SMM Jets to NW and SE . Jets to N and S 