 The popularly accepted theory for the forma tion of the EarthMoon system is that the Moon was formed from debris of a strong impact by a giant planetesimal with the Earth at the close of the planetforming period Hartmann and Davis . Since the formation of the EarthMoon system it has been evolving at all tim e scale. It is well known that the Moon is receding from us and both the Earths rotation and Moons rotation are slowing. The popular th eory is that the tidal fric tion causes all those changes. However based on tidal friction model and the current MoonEarth system data the tidal friction should be stronger and the recessiona l rate of the Moon should be greater in the past because the Moon was closer the distance of the Moon would quickly fall inside the Roches limit for earth km in which the Moon would be torn apart by gravity in to billion years ago. This however never happened. Furthermore geological evidence indicates that the reces sion of the Moon in the past was slower than the present rate i. e. the recession has been accelerating with time. Based on tidal friction models it must be concluded that tidal friction was ve ry much less in the remote past than we would deduce on the basis of presentday observations S tacey . This was called geological time scale difficulty or Lunar cr isis and is one of main arguments by creationists against the tidal friction theory Brush . Various models were proposed in the past to describe the evolution of the EarthMoon system based on tidal friction mechanism to avoid this difficulty and put th e Moon at quite a comfortable distance from Earth at . billion years ago Hansen Kagan and Maslova Ray et al. Slichter . The tidal friction theories explain that the present rate of tidal dissipation is anomalously high because the tidal force is close to a resona nce in the response function of ocean Brush . Kagan gave a detailed review about those tidal friction models Kagan . However all those m odels are based on many assumptions about geological continental position and drifting and physical conditions in the past and many parameters such as phase lag angle multimode approximation with timedependent frequencies of the resonance modes etc. have to be introduced and carefully adjusted to make their predictions close to the geological evidence. Therefore they are not so convincing and are still challenged by cr eationists. In the Meeting of Division of Particle and Field American Physical Society University of California at Riverside the author proposed a dark matte r field fluid model Pan the current Moon and Earth data agree with this model very well. This paper will demonstrate that the past evolution of MoonEarth system can be described by the da rk matter field fluid model without any assumptions about past geological and physical conditions. Although the subject of the evolution of the EarthMoon system has been extensively studied analytically or numerically to the authors knowledge there are no theories similar or equivalent to this model. It should be noted that the proposed dark matter field fluid is more like the cosmic fluid in distinguishing to the galactic halo or clump type of the dark matter in current cosmological theories. . The dark matter field fluid model In this proposed model it is assumed that . A celestial body rotates and moves in the space which for simplicity is uniformly filled with the dark matter which is in qui escent state relative to the motion of the celestial body. The dark matter possesses a fi eld property and a fluid property it can interact with the celestial body w ith its fluid and fiel d properties theref ore it can have energy exchange with the celestial body and affect the motion of the celestial body. . The fluid property follows the general prin ciple of fluid mechanics. The dark matter field fluid particles may be so small that they can easily permeate into ordinary baryonic matter i. e. ordina ry matter objects could be satu rated with such dark matter field fluid. Thus the whole celestial body intera cts with the dark matter field fluid in the manner of a sponge moving thru water. The natu re of the field propert y of the dark matter field fluid is unknown. It is here assumed that the interaction of the field associated with the dark matter field fluid with the celes tial body is proportional to the mass of the celestial body. The dark matter fiel d fluid is assumed to have a repulsive force against the gravitational force towards baryonic matter. Th e nature and mechanism of such repulsive force is unknown. With the assumptions above one can study how the dark matter field fluid may influence the motion of a cel estial body and compare the results with observations. The common shape of celestial bodies is spherical. According to Stokess law a rigid non permeable sphere moving through a quiescent fluid with a sufficiently low Reynolds number experiences a resistance force F rv F where v is the moving velocity r is the radius of the sphere and is the fluid viscosity constant. The direction of the resistance forc e in equation is opposite to the direction of the velocity. For a rigid sphere moving through the dark matter field fluid due to the dual properties of the dark matter field fluid and its permeation into the sphere the force F may not be proportional to th e radius of the sphere. Also F may be proportional to the mass of the sphere due to the field interacti on. Therefore with the combined effects of both fluid and field the force exerted on the sphere by the dark matter field fluid is assumed to be of the scaled form mv r Fn where n is a parameter arising from saturation by dark matter field fluid the rn can be viewed as the effective radius with the same unit as r m is the mass of the sphere and is the dark matter field fluid c onstant which is equivalent to . The direction of the force in equation is opposite to th e velocity. The force described by equation is velocity dependent and causes negativ e acceleration. According to Newtons second law of motion the equation of mo tion for the sphere is mv rdtdvmn Then exp t r v vn where v is the initial velocity t of the sphere. If th e sphere revolves around a massive gravitational center ther e are three forces in the lin e between the sphere and the gravitational center the gravitational for ce the centripetal acceleration force and the repulsive force of the dark matter fi eld fluid. The drag force in equation reduces the orbital velocity and causes the sphere to move inward to the gravitational center. However if the sum of the centripetal acceleration force and the repulsive force is stronger than the gravitational force then the sphere will move outward and recede from the gravitational center. This is the case of interest here. If the velocity change in equation is sufficiently slow and the re pulsive force is small compared to the gravitational force and centripetal accelerati on force then the rate of receding will be accordingly relatively slow. Therefore th e gravitational force and the centripetal acceleration force can be approximately treate d in equilibrium at any time. The pseudo equilibrium equation is Rmv RGMm where G is the gravitational constant M is the mass of the gravitational center and R is the radius of the orbit. Inserting v of equation into equation yields exp t r vGMRn or exp t r R Rn where vGMR R is the initial distance to the gravitational center. Note that R exponentially increases with time. The increase of orbital energy with the receding comes from the repulsive force of dark matter field fluid. Th e recessional rate of the sphere is R rdtdRn The acceleration of the recession is R r dtR dn . The recessional acceleration is positive and proportional to its distance to the gravitational center so the r ecession is faster and faster. According to the mechanics of fluids for a rigid nonpermeable sphere rotating about its central axis in the quiescent fluid the torque T exerted by the fluid on the sphere is r T where is the angular velocity of the sphere. Th e direction of the torq ue in equation is opposite to the direction of the rotation. In the case of a sphere ro tating in the quiescent dark matter field fluid with angular velocity similar to equation the proposed T exerted on the sphere is m r Tn The direction of the torque in equation is opposite to the direction of the rotation. The torque causes the negative angular acceleration dtdI T where I is the moment of inertia of the sphere in the dark matter field fluid nr m I Therefore the equation of rotation for the sphere in the dark matter field fluid is nrdtd Solving this equation yields exp t rn where is the initial angul ar velocity. One can see that the angular velocity of the sphere exponentially decreases with time and the angular de celeration is proportional to its angular velocity. For the same celestial sphere combining equation and eq uation yields . dtdR Rdtd The significance of equation is that it contains only observed data without assumptions and undetermined parameters therefor e it is a critical test for this model. For two different celestial spheres in the same system combining equation and equation yields . n rr dtdR Rdtd This is another critical test for this model. . The current behavior of the EarthMoon system agrees with the model The EarthMoon system is the simplest gravitational system. The solar system is complex the Earth and the Moon experience no t only the interaction of the Sun but also interactions of other planets. Let us consider the local EarthMoon gravitational system as an isolated local gravitational system i.e. the influence from the Sun and other planets on the rotation and orbital motion of the Moon and on the rotation of the Earth is assumed negligible compared to the forces exerted by the Moon and Earth on each other. In addition the eccentricity of the Moons or bit is small enough to be ignored. The data about the Moon and the Earth from references Dickey et .al. and Lang are listed below for the readers convenience to verify the calculation because the data may vary slightly with di fferent data sources. Moon Mean radius r . km Mass m . gram Rotation period . days Angular velocity of Moon . rad s Mean distance to Earth Rm km Mean orbital velocity v . km s Orbit eccentricity e . Angular rotation acceleration rate . . arcsec century . . rad century . . rad s Receding rate from Earth . . cm year . . m s Earth Mean radius r . km Mass m . gram Rotation period h m . s . s Angular velocity of rotation . rad s Mean distance to the Sun R m . km Mean orbital velocity v . km s Angular acceleration of Earth . . rad s The Moons angular rotation accele ration rate and increase in mean distance to the Earth receding rate were obtained from the lunar laser ranging of the Apollo Program Dickey et .al. . By inserting the data of th e Moons rotation and rece ssion into equation the result is . . . . . . The distance R in equation is from th e Moons center to the Earths center and the number km is assumed to be the distance fr om the Moons surface to the Earths surface. Equation is in good agreement with the th eoretical value of .. The result is in accord with the model used here. The difference about . between the values of . and . may come from several sources . Moons orbital is not a perfect circle . Moon is not a perfect rigid sphere. . The effect from Sun and other planets. . Errors in data. . Possible other unknown reasons. The two parameters n and in equation and equation can be determined with two data sets. The third data set can be us ed to further test the model. If this model correctly describes the situation at hand it sh ould give consistent results for different motions. The values of n and calculated from three different data sets are listed below Note the mean distance of the Moon to th e Earth and mean radii of the Moon and the Earth are used in the calculation. The value of n n . From the Moons rotation . s m From the Earths rotation . s m From the Moons recession . s m One can see that the three values of are consistent within the range of error in the data. The average value of . . s m By inserting the data of the Earths rota tion the Moons recession and the value of n into equation the result is . . . . . . . This is also in accord with the model used here. The dragging force exerted on the Moons orbital motion by the dark matter field fluid is . N this is negligibly small compared to the gravitational force between the Moon and the Earth . N and the torque exerted by the dark matter field fluid on the Earths and the Moon s rotations is T . Nm and . Nm respectively. . The evolution of EarthMoon system Sonett et al. found that the length of the terrestrial day million years ago was about . hours based on the laminated tidal sediments on the Earth Sonett et al . . According to the model presented here back in that time the length of the day was about . hours this ag rees very well with Sonett et al. s result. Based on the dark matter field fluid model and the above result the closest distance cen ter to center of the Moon to the Earth was about km or about twothirds of current distance at . billion years ago this is fa r beyond the Roches lim it. This number agrees closely with some of earlier MoonEarth models. The clos est distance of the Moon to the Earth by Hansens models was about Earth radii or km Hansen . According to this model the length of day of the Earth wa s about hours at . b illion years ago. Fig. shows the evolution of the distance of Moon to the Earth and the length of day of the Earth with the age of the Ea rthMoon system described by this model along with data from Kvale et al. Sonett et al. and Scrutton . One can see that those data fit this model very well in their time range. Fig. shows the geological data of solar days year from Wells and from Sonett et al. and the desc ription solid line by this dark matter field fluid model for past million years. One can see that the model agrees with the geological and fossil data beautifully. The important difference of this model w ith early models in describing the early evolution of the EarthMoon system is that this model is based only on current data of the EarthMoon system and there are no assumptions about the conditions of earlier Earth rotation and continental drifting. Based on this model the EarthM oon system has been smoothly evolving to the current position since it was established and the recessional rate of the Moon has been gradually increasing however this description do es not take it into account that there might be speci al events happened in the past to cause the suddenly significant changes in the motions of the Eart h and the Moon such as strong impacts by giant asteroids and comets etc because those impacts are very co mmon in the universe. The general pattern of the evolution of the EarthMoon system described by this model agrees with geological evidence. Based on equa tion the recessional rate exponentially increases with time. One may then imagine th at the recessional rate will quickly become very large. The increase is in fact extremely slow. The Moons recessional rate will be . m s after billion years and . m s after billion years. However whether the Moons r ecession will continue or at some time later another mechanism will take over is not known. It should be understood that the tidal friction does affect the evolution of the Earth itself such as the surface crust structure continental drifting and evolution of biosy stem etc it may also play a role in slowing the Earths rotation however such role is not a dominant mechanism. Unfortunately there is no data available for the changes of the Earths orbital motion and all other members of solar system. According to this model and above results the recessional rate of the Earth should be . m s . m year . km century the length of a year increases about . ms and the change of the temperature is . K year with constant radiation level of th e Sun and the stable environment on the Earth. The length of a year at billion years ago would be of the current length of the year. However much evidence growthbands of corals and shellfish as well as some other evidences suggest th at there has been no apparent change in the length of the year over the billion years and the Earths orbita l motion is more stable than its rotation in which it experiences the dragging torque by the da rk matter field fluid. This suggests that dark matter field fluid is circulating around Sun with the same direction and similar speed of Earth at least in the Earths orbital ra nge. Therefore the Earths orbital motion experiences very little or no dragging force from the dark matter field fluid. However this is a conjecture extensive research has to be conducted to verify if this is the case. . Skeptical description of the evolution of the Mars The Mars is our nearest ne ighbor which has attracted gr eat attention since ancient time. The exploration of the Mars has been heating up in recent decades. NASA Russian and Europe Space Agency sent many space crafts to the Mars to collect data and study this mysterious planet. So far there is still not enough data about the history of this planet to describe its evolution. Same as the Earth the Mars rotates about its central axis and revolves around the Sun howev er the Mars does not have a massive moon circulating it and there is no liquid fluid on its surface ther efore there is no apparent oceanlike tidal friction force to slow its rota tion by tidal friction theories. Based on the above result and current the Marss data this model predicts that the Marss rotati on also experiences the dragging torque by the dark matter field fluid and the angular rotati on acceleration of the Mars should be about . rad s. Figure describes the possible evolution of the length of day and the solar daysMars year the vertical dash line marks the current age of the Mars with assumption that the Mars was formed in a similar time period of the Earths formation. Such description is complete ly skeptical due to lack of reliable data. The research and exploration of the Mars has been expanded dram atically in recent decades. We shall feel confident that the reliable data about the angular rotation acceleration of the Mars will be available in th e near future which will provide a vital test for the predication of this model. However there are also other factors which may affect the Mars rotation rate such as mass redist ribution due to season change winds possible volcano eruptions and Mars quake s. Therefore the data has to be carefully analyzed. . Discussion about the model From the above results one can see that the current EarthMoon data and the geological and fossil data agree with the mode l very well and the pa st evolution of the EarthMoon system can be described by th e model without intr oducing any additional parameters this model reveals the interesting relationship between the rotation and receding Eq. and Eq. of the same celestial body or different celestial bodies in the same gravitational system such relationshi p is not known before. Such success can not be explained by coincidence or luck because of so many data involved current Earths and Moons data and geological and fossil data if one thinks that this is a wrong model although the chance for the natural ha ppening of such coincidence or luck could be greater than wining a jackpot lotter y otherwise a new theory from different approach can be developed to give the same or better description as this model does. It is certain that this model is not perfect and ma y have defects further development may be conducted. James Clark Maxwell said in The vast interplanetary and interstellar regions will no longer be regarde d as waste places in the universe which the Creator has not seen fit to fill with the symbols of th e manifold order of His kingdom. We shall find them to be already full of this wonderf ul medium so full that no human power can remove it from the smallest portion of space or produce the slightest flaw in its infinite continuity. It extends unbr oken from star to star . The medium that Maxwell talked about is the aether which was proposed as the carrier of light wave propagation. The MichelsonMorley experiment only proved th at the light wave propagation does not depend on such medium and did not reject the existence of the medium in the interstellar space. In fact the concept of the interstellar medium has been developed dramatically recently such as the dark matter dark energy cosmic fluid etc. The d ark matter field fluid is just a part of such wonderful me dium and precisely de scribed by Maxwell. . Conclusion The evolution of the EarthMoon system can be described by the dark matter field fluid model and the current data of the Eart h and the Moon fit this model very well. At . billion years ago the closest distance of the Moon to the Earth could be about km which is far beyond the Roches limit and the length of day was about hours. The general pattern of the evoluti on of the EarthMoon system described by this model agrees with geological and fossil evidence. The tidal friction may not be the primary cause for the evolution of the EarthMoon system. This model predicts that the Marss rotation is also slowing with the angular a cceleration rate about . rad s. 