 EXHya is anIntermediate PolarIPa subclass of magnetic Cat aclysmic Variable Stars mCVs where a latetype main seque nce star transfers material to the magnetic white dwarf star as t he two stars orbit each other under the inuence of their mutual gra v itation. Unlike in Polars another subclass of mCVs where t he white dwarf is in synchronous rotation with the binary rotat ion PspinPorbthe whitedwarf inan IPisinasynchronous rotation with the orbital motion of the system. EX Hya however is nea rer synchronismthanthemajorityofIPsasithasaspinperiod . min which is about its orbital period . min Mumford Hellier etal. and is one of only six out of thirty nine conrmedIPswithitsorbitalperiodbelowthehCVperiod gap Nortonet al. .It has aninclination i. Recent studies have shown that EX Hya does not conform to the traditional IP model King Wynn Wynn Belleet al. Nortonet al. Belleet al. . This sys Email ncebacircinus.ast.uct.ac.zatem has a large PspinPorbratio . implying that it can not be in the usual spin equilibrium rotation since most IPs have been shown to attain spin equilibrium near PspinPorb . KingWynn Wynn . This further implies that the corotation radius is far greater than the circularisati on radius RcoRcir and that EX Hya cannot possess a Keplerian disc. Systems with Keplerian discs are expected to have RcoRcirand thus a smaller PspinPorb. These factors have prompted theorists to suggest that the spin equilibrium state in EX Hya is determin ed byRcob wherebis the distance to the inner Lagrangian point LKing Wynn Wynn Norton etal. . In this model the accretion curtains extend to near the Lpoint and EX Hya resembles an asynchronous Polar where most of the materi al accretes viathe streamKing Wynn Wynn andvia both the ringof material near the Roche lobe radius of the pri mary and the stream Norton etal. depending on the orbital and spin periods of the system and the magnetic eld strength. I n the later publication it was shown that material in EX Hya is fed f rom a ring of material at the outer edge of the Roche lobe and that for ccirclecopyrt RASN. MhlahloD.A.H.Buckley V.S.DhillonS.B.PotterB. Wa rnerandP.A.Woudt Date HJDstart Time Spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table.Tableofspectroscopic observations duringquiescence in and . The column Datedenotes the date at the beginning of the observing nightbeforemidnight thecolumn Timedenotes thenumber ofobserving hours and Spectrathe number of spectra obtained. thePspinPorbof EX Hya this mode of accretion is preferred over streamfedaccretion. In this work we present spectroscopic data of EX Hya in qui escenceobtainedfromtheSAAOinjustbeforeEXHyawen t intooutburstandadayortwoafteroutburstandin.Ou tburst data of willbe discussed ina laterpublication. OBSERVATIONSAND DATA REDUCTION . Observations EX Hya was observed in April of by Buckley et al. usingtheSAAO.mtelescope withtheReticonphotoncount ing system RPCSdetector on the Cassegrainspectrograph. A gr ating with a resolution of mmwas used and a wavelength range of A was covered at a spectral resolution of . A and at a time resolution of s. The spectrograph slit width was m . arcsecs. Wavelength calibration expo sures were taken using a CuAr arc lamp. Three nights of observ a tions and April were covered in quiescence an d in total spectra were obtained. The observing log is giv en in Table together withthe startingtimesof the observations . Following wavelengthcalibration and skysubtraction t he data were ux calibrated using the spectra of the standard st ar LTT. . Observations Theobservations wereobtainedusingtheSITeCCDdetec tor pixels on the Cassegrain spectrograph of the SAAO .m telescope. A grating with a resolution of mmwas used over the wavelength range A on the nights of the th and th April. Another grating witha resolution of mmwas used on the th th and th April over the range A. The spectral resolution was .A and a binning scheme was employed i.e. binning by in the spatial direction. The exposure times during observations were s. The observations covered the period April April and in total spectra were obtained Table . The extraction a nd re duction of the data were performed the standard way using the Image Reduction and Analysis Facility IRAFpackage and the IRAF is a software package for the reduction and analysis of a stronom ical data distributed by National Optical Astronomy Observ atory NOAOFigure . Radialvelocity Fourier amplitude spectra from the co m bined data are shown for km sand km sfor the Hline top left panel and second left panel fromthe top and for kmsand kmsfortheHlinetoprightpanelandsecondrightpanelfromthe top.denotes the orbital frequency of the system its rst harmonic andthe upper orbital side band where is the spin frequency. The data were prewhitened by the orbital frequency and are displ ayed in the third panels from the top. Window spectra are plotted below t he amplitude spectra bottom panels. spectra were uxcalibrated using observations of the stand ard star LTT. THERADIAL VELOCITIES ItiswidelyacceptedthatinacanonicalCVthehighvelocit yemis sion line wings are formed in the inner parts of the accretion disc orbiting close to the white dwarf and thus should reect its o rbital motion Shafter Shafter Szkody Shafter . In IPs however high velocity emission line wings are forme d in the gas streaming towards the white dwarf at high velociti es Hellieretal. Ferrario Wickramasinghe . The r a dial velocities were determined by measuring the wings of th e H and Hemission lines from the data and the data obtained on the th was not added since EX Hya had not fully recovered from outburst and the wings of H Hand H emission lines from the data using the Gaussian Convolu tion which is operated by the Association of Universities for Res earch in As tronomy AURA ccirclecopyrt RASMNRAS SpectroscopicStudyoftheIP EXHydraein Quiescence Figure . Radial velocity amplitude spectra shown for the H line from for km sand km s. The vertical dashed line shows the expected position of the orbital and spin period pe aks. The data were prewhitened by and are shown in the third panel from the top. A window spectrum is shown at the bottom. Scheme GCS Schneider Young Shafter Szkody Shafter.TheGCSmethodconvolveseachspectrumwitht wo identical Gaussian one in the red wing and one in the blue win g. The separation between the two Gaussians is . Care was taken nottoincluderegionsfaroutinthewingswherethecontinuu m be ginstodominate bychoosing reasonable values ofthewidth of the Gaussians and . Twelve standard Gaussian bandpasses were used with values ranging from to km sand corre sponding widthvalues from to km s. . PeriodSearches The radial velocities were Fourier transformed using the Di screte Fourier Transform DFT algorithm to search for any periods in the data Deeming Kurtz . The H and Hamplitude spectra from and Aprilare shown inFigure and th e Hamplitude spectra from are showninFigure . A prominent peak at a frequency corresponding to the minute orbital frequency is observed in all the emission lines. Second in strength to the orbital frequency is the spin frequ ency of the narrow swave component NSC km s Figures and . The third panels from the top in Figures and show the data after prewhitening by . Power at is clearly present. The spin frequency was not detected at high values of km s where it is most expected since at these velocitiesthematerialisquiteclosetothewhitedwarfand itsemis sion is expected to be modulated at the white dwarf spin perio d.It was alsonot present in H and Hradial velocities of . The amplitude of relativeto wasfound tobe for H for Hand for H . ORBITALVARIATIONSOF THEEMISSIONLINES The data were phasebinned on the orbital ephemeris of Helli er Sprouts Teclipse . . E whereEis the number of orbital cycles and T is the time of mid eclipse.Thisephemeris isdenedbythezeropoint ofmidec lipse where minimum intensity is at phase .. This means that for t he radial velocitiesmaximum blueshift isperpendicular tot he line of centres at phase . meaning that spectroscopic phase ze ro oc curs at the bluetored crossing of the emission line radial velocity curve. phase bins were used toproduce the radial velociti es. . OrbitalTomograms andTrailed Spectra The H Hand HDoppler tomograms were computed using the Back Projection Method BPM with the application of a l ter and the Maximum Entropy Method MEM Marsh Horne Marsh Horne Spruit .TheBPMDoppler maps are shown in Figure and those constructed using MEM are shown in Figure . Error in ephemerides both orbital and spi n is sufciently small to phase all of our data accurately on the o rbital andspin cycles. A velocity amplitude of the primary K km s from our radial velocity measurements and that of the second ary K km s taken from Vande Putte et al. and Beuermannetal.wereusedtoxthepositionsoftheR oche lobe and the stream trajectories on the tomograms. A seconda ry massM.. M for EX Hya was derived from the up todatesecondary massperiodrelationof SmithDhillon . The mass of the primary M was then determined from the above values usingK KM Mand was found tobe . . M . The H Hand HeI Doppler tomograms Figure and show strong emission at the bright spot some at the Roc he lobe and the stream and some from the disc. Those of H also show strong bright spot emission but less or no emission from the stream.DiscemissionisdiminishedinH whencomparedtoother emissionlinesespeciallyathighervelocities.Thisismo reobvious in the BPM tomogram. The bright spot emission falls near the r e gion km s. Averagesubtracted trailed spectra Fig ure show the corresponding NSC. ergs cms of the original line uxes is contained in the averag e subtracted proles of H and H andergs cms is contained inH and HeI. This uxis mainly due tothebright spotandthe stream.Thetrailedspectra hav ebeen repeatedover cycles for clarity. The trailed spectra of have revealed two interesting fe a tures. The rst one is the asymmetry in the intensity of the s wave Figure . In H the red wing of the NSC is brighter at ..andseemstoreachmaximumbrightnessnear . whereas the blue wing is dimmer in the range .. and seems toreach minimum brightness near .. A similar ef fectisseenintheH andtheH linesandtoalesser extentinHeI . The second feature is redshifted emission extending f rom the NSCto highvelocities km s at earlybinary phases ... ccirclecopyrt RASMNRAS N. MhlahloD.A.H.Buckley V.S.DhillonS.B.PotterB. Wa rnerandP.A.Woudt Figure. ThepanelsshowtheH HHandHeIorbitalDopplermapsfromandH tomogramsofconstructed usingtheBackProjection Method with the application of a lter top panels and after subtracting the average of the line prole bottom panels. The positions of the Roche lobe and stream trajectories areshown velocity amplitudes of KkmsandK kmsfor theprimary and secondary starsrespectively wereuse d.The two curves with marked intervals represent the gas stream ve locity upper curve and the Keplerian velocity along the st ream lower curve. Thecircles on all tomograms represent . of the distance from the L point to the primary. The three crosses are centres of mass of the secondary system and primary from toptobottom. The asterisk represents the velocity of clo sest approach. All the maps are plotted on the same velocity s cale. The lookup table of this gure is such that the brightest emission features appear with decre asing intensity from yellowgreen to light blue in the onlin e edition or white to grey in the printed edition. The reconstructed trailed spectra suggest that this latter fea ture is another swave which we shall refer to as the high vel ocity component HVC crossing the NSC near ... The Doppler tomograms show emission extending from the bright s pot positionpassingalongthestreampathtothebottomleft quadrant at high velocities near km swhich is responsible for the HVC most of this emission does not fall within the disc and ga s streamvelocities onthe mapsuggesting thatthere wassmal lor no overlapof the stream component withthedisc. Thetomogramsshowedsimilarresults.Itisworthnotin g thatmostofthediscemissionincamefromtheouterdisc than in. Even though the MEM and BPM pick out the same features in the BP tomograms some features are more prominent than in the MEM tomograms while the reconstruction obtained using t he MEMreproduces the observed data well. The advantage of BPM over MEM is that it is faster and it is easier to get a consistent set of maps of different emissio n lines interms of the apparent noise in the images. For this reaso n both methods have been used. SPINVARIATIONSOFTHE EMISSIONLINES . TheSpinRadial VelocityCurve The radial velocities were phasefolded using bins on the quadratic spin ephemeris of Hellier Sproats where spin maximum was dened as . Figure shows the variation of theHHandHnarrowcomponentswith .Maximumblueshift isseen at .for Hand at. forH.Whereas for H maximum blueshift is seen at .. It should be noted thatHandHHhavenotbeenobservedsimultaneouslyandsoboth data sets probably sample the spin phases at different o rbital phases. FigureshowstheH narrowcomponent kms andthebroadbasecomponent kmsoverplotted.The twocomponents areinphase.Theradialvelocityvariationw iththe spin period of the H and Hbroadbase component could not be detected possibly due to velocity cancellation We discuss this in Section. . SpinTomograms andTrailed Spectra Spin tomograms of EX Hya were constructed by Hellier but revealed little information. Also Belleet al. o bserved no coherent emission sites on their tomograms folded on the spin phase. The Hand the H BPM and MEM spin tomograms from however have revealed a coherent emission site betwe en Vx km sand km swhich is evidence of emis sion from the accretion curtains Figures and . But it is a well knownfact thatsince thespinperiodis ofthe orbitalperiodin EX Hya orbital cycle variations do not smear out when folded on the spin phase but repeat every spin cycles Hellieret al. . Thisisthought tobetheoriginofmostofthestructureinthe emis sion lines at velocities km sHellier . To address thisproblemphaseinvariantsubtractionisperformedwh ereemis sion that does not vary with the spin cycle is subtracted from the data. This is achieved by measuring minimum ux at each wave length and subtracting this value. The results are shown int he sec ondpanelsfromthetopofFigure.Itshouldbementionedtho ugh that even subtracting the invariant part of the line proles does not guaranteethattheinuenceoftheorbitalperiodvariation shasbeen completelyremoved. ccirclecopyrt RASMNRAS SpectroscopicStudyoftheIP EXHydraein Quiescence Figure . HH Hand HeI trailed spectra top row of pan els and MEM orbital Doppler maps second row of panels from t he top as well as the averagesubtracted trailed spectra third ro w of panels are shown plotted on the same scale except for H panels. The HVC and the NSC are indicated. The fourth row shows the averagesubtrac ted Doppler maps and the models plotted for q.iandM.M. The bottom panels are the reconstruction of the averagesubtra cted data. The fourth and bottom panels are also plotted on the same scale ex cept for H panels. The lookup table of this gure is such that the bright est emission features appear with decreasing intensity from black to lig ht grey. A spinwave todifferentiate it from the swave which is nor mallycausedbythebrightspotintheH trailedspectraFigure wasdetectedfromthedataafterthephaseinvariantsubtra ctionwas performed. This is the rst detection of modulation over the spin cycle in the optical emission line data of EX Hya. This spinw ave can be seen in the trailed spectra before but hard to see and af ter subtraction of the phaseinvariant line prole. The nar row peak component is responsible for this spinwave which is shown e x Radial Velocity kmsSPIN PHASE Figure . The Htop panel H middle panel and H bottom panel spinradialvelocitiesofthenarrowcomponentfromthe combineddata HandHanddataH .Theradialvelocities wereprewhitened by the orbital frequency and phasefolded on the spin frequenc y using bins and are shown plotted as afunction of the spin phase. Figure . The spin radial velocity curves of the H narrow crosses and broad dots components from bins plotted as a func tion of the spin phase. Thesolid line represents atto thedata. pandedinthesecondcolumnofpanelsinFigurethenarrowp eak component wasselectedbyhandoveravelocityrangeof km s. The spinwave shows maximum blueshift near phase .and maximum redshift near phase . and has an amplitude of kms.TheHtomogramshowscorrespondingemissionnearthe oclockpositionblobofemissionrightattheedgeofth emap around km s. DFTs show lower amplitude km s forHandkmsforHandHprobablyduetodi lutionbystationarymaterial.AlsotheH MEMtomogram shows strongeremissionthatpeaksinabroadstructureatlowerve locities Vx km s km s around the oclock position.Circularmotiongivesrisetoloworzeroradialv elocities whenthe motionisperpendicular tothe lineof sightandthe emis sionseenaroundtheoclockpositioncouldnotbefrom such velocities since it shows maximum blueshift at ... Similar emission was observed in a Polar and was thought to be due tomaterial that has just been decelerated after having a ttached to the magnetic eld lines Schwarz etal. we discuss a n alternative explanation in Section . The emission near th e edge ccirclecopyrt RASMNRAS N. MhlahloD.A.H.Buckley V.S.DhillonS.B.PotterB. Wa rnerandP.A.Woudt Figure. TheHHHand HeI trailed spectra from folded on the spin period are shown at the top panels and the average subtracted spectra are shown at the second panels. Doppler maps constru cted from the phaseinvariant subtracted spectra are shown in the bot tom panels. The Doppler maps were constructed using the BPM and are shown on t he same velocity scale with thetrailed spectra. Thelookup table is as in Figure . of the tomogram at km s shows maximum blueshift at . and therefore cannot be due to motion perpendicular to the line of sight either. TheHtrailedspectraalsoshowemissioncoupledtothespin wave near .. that extends to high velocities in the red a similar situation to that seen the in orbital tomogram s due to the HVC Section .. The corresponding emission in the H tomograms extending tohigher velocitiesintheredspectra l region isnot clear. Both the H and Hphaseinvariant subtracted trailedspectra show three weakintensity spinwaves. The most clearly vis ible of the three is phased with maximum redshift near .. with an estimated velocity amplitude of km sand corre sponds to the emission near the oclock position in the to mo gram Figure . The reconstructed trailed spectra reprodu ce the observed data. The Hand Htrailed spectra in Figure seem to support these results. The emission observed near the oclock pos ition in the tomograms has also been seen in other IPs such as AO Psc andFOAqrHellier andwasinterpretedas emanatingfr om the upper accretioncurtain. The spinwaves are weak in intensity though and more data are needed tosupport these results. DISCUSSIONOF THEORBITAL ANDSPINDATA The generally accepted model of EX Hya has the material leavi ng the secondary star through the L point passing via a stream of material which orbits about the white dwarf to form an accre tion Figure . H Hand Htrailed spectra of folded on the spin period areshowninthetoppanelsandthephaseinvariant subtract edtrailedspectra areshowninthesecondpanelsfromthetop.MEMspinDopplert omograms constructed from the phaseinvariant subtracted spectra a re shown in the third panels with the reconstructed spectra in the bottom pa nels. The spin wave observed in the H phaseinvariant subtracted trailed spectra which was caused by the H narrow component is shown expanded on a smaller velocity scale.Therstcolumn ofpanelsareplotted betwee n kms and km sand the last two column are plotted between km sand km s. Thelookup table is as in Figure . disc.Themagneticeldlinesofthewhitedwarfwhichformac cre tioncurtainsaboveandbelowtheorbitalplanechannelthem aterial from the disc starting from the corotation radius Rco where the discistruncatedbytheeldlinestothesurface ofthewhit edwarf Hellieretal. Rosen etal. . King Wynn challenged this model by arguing that systemswith PspinPorb.cannotpossessKepleriandiscssince thisimplies RcoRcir.Theyshowedthatthespinequilibriumstate inEX Hya isdetermined by Rcob wherebis the distance tothe Lpoint. In this model the accretion curtains extend to near th eL pointandEXHyaresemblesanasynchronous polarwheremost of the material accretes via the stream King Wynn Wynn . Belle et al. revised the model of EX Hya after they showed that their EUV data support the model of King Wynn ccirclecopyrt RASMNRAS SpectroscopicStudyoftheIP EXHydraein Quiescence . Their revised model suggested that the magnetic el d in EXHyaformsalargeaccretioncurtainextending totheouter edge of the Roche lobe causing part or all of the nonKeplerian disc hereafter the ringof m a terialor the ring torotate withthe white dwarf an extended bulge later Belle et al. showed that the re was Vertically Extended Material VEM obscuring the swav e emission during .. and evidence for overowing stream accretioninEXHya and theringofmaterialtofeelmagneticforceattheregionsoft he ring close to the poles causing the ring material at these lo cations to be controlled by the magnetic eld forming two chunks alo ng the accretionringthat rotate withthe whitedwarf. RecentlyNortonetal.a haveshownthatforsys tems with PspinPorb. when the mass ratio is smaller at q. the material forms a ring near the edge of the primary Rochelobefromwhereaccretioncurtainsfunneldowntothe white dwarf surface in agreement with King Wynn and Belle et al. . The material is fed from the ring ringfed acc retion and channeled along the magnetic eld lines when the angle b e tween the white dwarf spin axis and magnetic dipole axis is sm all i.ewhichis true for EXHya. The discussion by Eisenbart etal. on the IRUV ux distributioninEXHyaimpliesadiscisobaricandisotherm alwith an outer radius of . cm and a thickness of cm and an assumed central hole of cm but Eisenbart et al. suggested that the structure could also be a ring with a large r in ner radius in line with the suggestion of King Wynn Belleet al. and Norton etal. . They found that t he disc component contains about of the total ux which is a b it more than expected from gravitational energy release at the inner radius R incm. Our spectroscopic data support both the model of Belle et al. and Norton et al. in which material from a ring cir cling the white dwarf and corotating with the magnetic eld lines atthe outer edge of theRoche lobe isaccretedbythe whitedw arf. Thepresenceofthebrightspotrevealedbythetrailedspect ra the DFTs of the radial velocities and the Doppler maps Figur es and suggest the presence of a disc or ring of material exten ding tonear the Roche lobe radiusaround thewhite dwarf. Whenco m paring the and tomograms for the H they appear to be in the same state or similar given the fact that they are ten y ears apart. It is reassuring that the fact that the twogroups of li nes have not been measured simultaneously is not a signicant proble m in the analysis. More importantly a spin pulse modulated at velocities con sistent with those of the material circulating at the outer e dge of the disc km s Figures and was detected and providesevidenceforcorotationoftheextendedaccretio ncurtains withtheringmaterial.AsdiscussedinSection.theselo wradial velocities mentioned above were not caused by motion perpen dic ular to the line of sight near the white dwarf neither were th ey caused byvelocity cancellationas willbe shown later. A spin wave was detected in the spinfolded trailed spectra of HFigure with a velocity semiamplitude of km s. The spin wave shows maximum blueshift near phase . when the upper magnetic pole is pointed away from theobserver andmaximumredshiftnear phase ..TheH equivalent widthsshowmaximum uxnear ..Thispicture isconsistentwiththeaccretioncurtainmodel ofIPsandisp ossible if accretion occurs via a discring. The spin tomograms Fig ures and show evidence of the accretion curtain emission exten ding fromkmstohighvelocities kmssuggesting that material is channeled along the eld lines from the oute r ring. The Hnarrow and broad base components show similar phase variation suggesting same position of maximum radial velo city as shown inFigures and line OA.This indicates that materi alis channeled from the ringat low velocities tohigh velociti es along the eldlines. A mass ratio of q. was measured from our data and so the periodratio PspinPorb.isconsistent withthe ringaccre tionmodel of Nortonet al.. Decreased prominence of the narrow swave component around.. Figure and was observed and sug gests the presence of VEM at the outer edge of the ring of ma terial obscuring the emission at these phases. The presence of the overow stream may be infered from this observation Bellee t al. .Butdirectevidence comes from orbitalDoppler tomog rams which show an asymmetry in the emission where more emission is observed from the secondary Roche lobe to the lower left qu ad rant than from the opposite side. Averagesubtracted orbit al tomo gramsshowthisemissionathighervelocities kms Figures and and it corresponds to the HVC observed in th e trailedspectra which is modulated witha velocitysemiam plitude of km s. This HVC is reminiscent of that detected by Rosen et al. in the trailed spectra of the AM Her system V Cen. Their HVC was blueshifted with a velocity of km sand was said to be produced in the stream close to the white dwarf. The only difference is that there was no evidence of th e HVCemissionwhenitwasexpectedtobeseenredwardofanothe r component mediumvelocity component intheir datawher eas in EX Hya the evidence of the HVC emission is missing between ... The HVC emission is maximally blueshifted at ...Thisphasingisconsistent withtheexpectedphase of impact of a stream of material from the secondary withthe d isc or of the overow stream material freefalling onto the magn eto sphere of the primary Hellieretal. . Support for overow stream is also provided by spin tomo grams where emission is observed on the upper accretion curt ain withvelocitiesconsistent withstreamvelocities.Thissu ggests that thisemissionsitemayalsohave resulteddue toimpactof ove row streamwiththemagnetosphere. The resultingemissionisre ceding from the observer at maximum redshift near . Figure inagreement withthe accretioncurtain model. The model of King Wynn is not fully supported by our observations since itpredicts direct accretionviaa st ream.Our observations however t the models of Nortonet al. and Belleet al. . There is evidence for strong H emis sion of the narrow swave component in the spin tomograms ce n tred around km sFigure that is not accounted for by these models. This emission shows maximum blueshift at phas e . suggesting thatthese are rotationalvelocities ora com bination of streaming and rotational velocities of the ant iphased motion of a source locked to the white dwarf. One possible exp la nation is that this emission comes from the opposite pole of t he white dwarf at a radial distance of cm Rwd. Siegel found that the eclipsed optical source in EX Hya is cen tred at a radial distance of . cm Rwd which is about four times closer to the white dwarf compared to our result. This c ould bethesameemissionregionbutinourobservationstheemis sionis spreadoutpossiblyduetothequalityofthedataandthisc ouldac count for the difference in the radial distance values quote d above. But we cannot imagine a geometry where such low rotational ve ccirclecopyrt RASMNRAS N. MhlahloD.A.H.Buckley V.S.DhillonS.B.PotterB. Wa rnerandP.A.Woudt .Observer. . . .. ring of material. .VEMthrough upper polemagnetic axis phases of maximum blueshift of the phase of maximum blueshift phases of maximum redshiftchunk of materials overflowing stream of the swavenarrow swave chunk of material with fieldcorotating phase of maximum blueshift of the HVC. .Observer.. .. outer disccorotating with fieldpart of disc maximum blueshift BBC phase of maximum intensityphase of ofmagnetic axis through upper pole phase of minimum intensity BBCmaximum redshiftphase of of . Figure. Amodelof EXHyain quiescence. Thegures aredrawn over theo rbital cycle left and spin cycle right and show themagne tosphere extending to the outer edge ofthe ring and the chunk of material corota ting with the eld lines. Averticaly extended material VEM isirradiated by the white dwarf in its inner regions left. B AO Observer Figure . A depiction of the regions where H was formed. Both the nar row and broad base components fall along the same radial dire ction OA resulting in similar phase variation. locitiescandominateoverstreamingvelocitiesalongthe eldlines near the whitedwarf. Wetherefore suggest that thisisevide nce for material that is diverted out of the orbital plane. Since one of the assumptions of Doppler tomography is that everything lies o n the plane itisnotpossible tolocate theexact positionof this emission relative tothe whitedwarf. . Whitedwarfandsecondary masses Hellieret al. showed that maximum line widths of km sconstrain the mass of the white dwarf and a freefall velocity of this magnitude could be achieved for white dwarf masses greater than . M . We found M ..M in good agreement with the results obtained from recent stud ies by Hoogerwerf et al. Beuermann et al. and Vande Putte etal. . For the secondary we derived M .. M from thesecondarymassperiodrelationofSmithDhillon and this value agrees with that obtained by Vande Putteet al. .Beuermann etal. and Hoogerwerf et al. nd lowe r values for M consistent with. M . Eisenbart et al. ar gues that for a secondary mass as low as . M the secondary wouldhave tobe substantiallyexpanded by . . Therevised modelof EX Hya We propose a model where one of the two chunks alluded to by Belle et al. which are formed by the magnetic pull alo ng theaccretionringcorotateswiththeaccretioncurtains attheouter edgeoftheRochelobeat kmsgivingrisetothepul sationof emissionat the spinperiodwhichwe observe inour d ata while the other is hidden by the accretion curtain below the r ing of material. The resulting emission is maximally blueshift ed near . Figure . In the accretion curtain model at . inthespincycleminimum uxduetohigheropacityisobse rved when the upper accretion pole of the white dwarf is pointed to wards the observer Hellieret al. and so the phasing m en tioned above is compatible with the motion of a rotating accr etion funnel. This is illustrated in Figure where the position of the observer at pulse maximum is indicated and the axis of the ma g netic pole is shown. The disruption of the disc by the magneti c eld at the outer disc is illustrated and part of the disc cor otating with the magnetosphere is shown. At a corotation radius Rc ba..logM Mcm the material is ro tating at a velocity of vGM b km s in good agreement with the observations. Also a rotation velocity of km s wasmeasuredfromthespectraandtheradialdistancefromth estar to the ring of material was found to be cm which is similar to b for a white dwarf mass of . M Keplerian motion about the white dwarf had to be assumed in these calculations . At this radius the accretion curtain is also rotating at a ve locity of RcoPspin km s. ergs cms integrated over one spin cycle of the original line uxes that is contained in the ave rage ccirclecopyrt RASMNRAS SpectroscopicStudyoftheIP EXHydraein Quiescence subtracted prole of H shows radial velocity variations with the spin period. Assuming that H and Halso show a similar ux variation H and Hspin tomograms also show a lowvelocity s wave but this result is not secured due to poor quality of data the total line uxes showing radial velocity variations wit h the spin period can be estimated to be ergs cms for the three emission lines. This is of the total disc ux Eisenbart etal. suggesting that only part of the rin g coro tates withthe white dwarf while the rest of the materialmay b e in volvedinanearKeplerianmotionthisisaroughcomparison since the uxis integrated over one spin cycle for H Hand Hinour data whereas Eisenbart etal. derived their total ux values fromonespectrumoverthewavelengthrange A. While some of the ring material corotates with the accre tion curtains i.e. remains in the disc rather than being imm edi ately channeled along the eld lines some is channeled alo ng the eld lines at km stowards the white dwarf. There is also some material that overows the ring and attaches onto the ma g neticeldlines.Theoverowstreamhitsthemagnetosphere prob ably causing a second bright spot on the slowly rotating magn eto sphere Figure . The overow stream is irradiated by the w hite dwarf initsinner regions close tothe whitedwarf theregio ns fac ing the white dwarf. This results in the HVC emission being o b scured at .. which are phases where the stream is viewed from behindopposite the side facing the white dwarf hid ing the irradiated inner regions. HVC emission from the stre am is blueshifted when that from the narrow swave component show s maximum redshift. Near . the two swaves intersect ex plaining the asymmetry in the brightness of the swave seen n ear .Figure .Theoverow streamcurls nearlybehindthe whitedwarfanditistruncatedbytheeldwhentheuppermagn etic pole is facingthe stream. Ferrario Wickramasinghe andFerrarioWickramas ingheKingshowedthatinIPstheaccretioncurtainb elow the orbital plane can contribute in the radial velocities of a system if it can be seen either through the central hole of the trunca ted disc or from below the disc or both. This effect will result in ve locity cancellation due to nearly equal quantities of mater ial that are blueshifted and redshifted on the accretion curtains F errario Wickramasinghe King. In EX Hya where the inclination is high and the disrup tionradius is large RWDfor a white dwarf mass of . M as proposed inFigure it is clear that we see spinvarying emis sionfromtwooppositemagneticpolesproducingafairlysy mmet ric structure in the spinfolded line proles Hellieret al . Rosenet al. . If emission from these opposite poles is c an cellingoutthenthesumwillhaveamuchlowervelocity.This could explainthe near zeroand low amplitude of the radial velocit yvari ation at the spin period of the H and H and Hlessorequalslant km s broadbase component respectively see also Hellieret al . and FerrarioWickramasinghe King. One could take this argument further by suggesting that the spin modulation we observe in our data at velocities near km sFigures and is just the slight asymmetries between the two poles. The resulting velocity could just be a measure of the degree to which the poles cancel their velocities near km sCoel Hellier private communication. This however can not be the case for H and Hsince these twoemission lines show motion that is consistent with that of a rotating object sug gesting that the line proles are not dominated by the infall velocit ies at the two opposite accretion poles. If they were produced clos e to the white dwarf then maximum rotational velocity near kmswould be RPspinkm swhich ismuch smaller than km s. However rotional velocities close to the ring are km s. For H however we observe maximum blueshift at.andsovelocityduetocancellationanywherebetween and km sare expected depending on how much the two poles cancel. If both accretion curtains are still visib le and symmetric at large radii which is possible as suggested by F er rario Wickramasinghe King and our model velocit y cancellation will still result in smaller amplitudes than t hose of km sobserved in our data. This would then count against the argument above. Furthermore H orbital Doppler tomograms showstrongemissionatthebright spot.Ifour modeliscorre ctthe eldlines should also attract this H dominated material whichis chanelledalong the eldlinesas alreadyshown above. The v eloc ity of this material due to streaming motion near the outer ri ng is less than that of the H broadbase component close to the white dwarf as expected. A strong constraint on our model is that t he disruption radius of EX Hya has been shown to be at cm Hellieretal. Beuermann etal. whichimpliesaw hite dwarf magnetic moment of G cm. For our model this would imply that the accretion curtains do not extend to near the Roche lobe radius. The theoretical analysis of King Wyn n andWynn however has shownthatequilibrium ro tationispossibleifthemagneticmomentinEXHyafallswith inthe rangeoflessorequalslantlessorequalslantGcm.Thesearecomparable toweakest eld AM Hers below the period gap and that EX Hya could pos sesssuch magnetic moments issupported toa certainextent b ythe averagesubtracted trailed spectra of EX Hya that are remin iscent ofemissionlines seeninsome Polarse.g.V Cenas discu ssed aboveEFEriCramptonet al. Cowleyet al. QST el RomeroColmenero et al. and VV Pup Diaz . Fur thermoreCumming raisedthepossibilitythatthema gnetic elds in IPs are buried by the material due to high accretion r ates andsoarenotreallyaslowastheyappear.Theringstructure inEX Hya could imply higher accretion rates in EX Hya than previou sly thought since the capacity of the ring of material to store ma tter may be low when compared to that of a classical disc resultin g in the accretionof more material thanina classical disc case. SUMMARY Optical observations of EX Hya and the analysis have suggest ed that large accretion curtains extending to a distance close to the Lpoint exist in this system. The DFTs and spin tomograms have for the rst time provided evidence for corotation of the el d lines with the ring material near the Roche lobe. Also tomography and the phasing of the spin waves have suggested that feeding by t he accretioncurtainsof thematerialfromtheringringfeda ccretion takesplace.ThesendingssupportthemodelsofBelleetal. and Norton et al. for EX Hya and the simulations done by Norton et al. a which have shown that for systems with t he parameters of EX Hya the accreting material forms a ring at t he outer edge of the primary Roche lobe from where accretion cu r tains funnel down tothe whitedwarf surface. Evidence for stream overow accretion has been observed. The HVC caused by the overow stream disappeared at ..duetoobscurationbythestream.ObscurationoftheNSC at..suggestedthepresenceoftheVEMwhichwas irradiatedbythe white dwarf initsinner regions. The Hbroadbase component shows a radial velocity varia tion with the spin period whereas that of H and Hcould not be ccirclecopyrt RASMNRAS N. MhlahloD.A.H.Buckley V.S.DhillonS.B.PotterB.Wa rner andP.A.Woudt detected. The lowamplitude velocity variations modulate d at the spin period for H and for H and His explained in terms of ve locitycancellation effects. We have provided an explanation for the asymmetry in the intensity of the narrow swave component seen in EX Hya trail ed spectra inthe optical. Thenarrow swave component and the H VC cross at. resulting in the asymmetry in brightness that we observe atthese phases. The spinfolded trailed spectra are not of good quality and more data are needed toconrm these results. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS NM would like to acknowledge nancial support from the Sains buryLinsbury Fellowship Trust and the University of Cape T own. WewouldliketothankKunegundaBelleCoelHellierandAndr ew Norton for invaluable discussions and for their constructi ve com ments.WeacknowledgeuseofD.ODonoghuesandTomMarshs programs Eagle andMolly respectively. 