 The chromosphere remains the least understood layer of the solar atmosphere with the very basics of its struc ture being hotly debated is it better described by the classical picture of a steady temperature rise as a func tion of height with superposed weak oscillations e.g. semi empirical models of Vernazza et al. Fontenla et al. or does the temperature keep dropping out wards with very hot shocks producing strong localized heating radiation hydrodynamic simulations of Carls son Stein and Wedemeyer et al. The latter concept is consistent with the IR observations of carbon monoxide which require cool gas to be present at chromospheric heights see e.g. Ayres . Thus existing models cannot provide a complete de scription of the solar chromosphere. Consequently now adays two alternative pictures of the chromosphere co exist and the role played by chromospheric dynamics in the structuring of this atmospheric layer is a subject of intense scientic debate. One reason for conicting models is that they are based either on atomic chromospheric lines and con tinua in the UV or on molecular lines in the IR since UV observations are practically blind to cool gas in a dynamic chromosphere while the IR observations sam ple only the cool part of the chromosphere. Improved and more sensitive diagnostics of the chromospheric structure and dynamics that sample both the hot and MDI TRACE CaII K BIMA . mm Fig. Portrait of the solar chromosphere at the center of the Suns disk at dierent wavelengths on May . From top left t o bottom right MDI longitudinal photospheric magnetogram UV A image from TRACE CaII K line center image from BBSO and BIMA image at . mm. the cool gas and should distinguish between the ri val models are provided by observations at millime ter wavelengths with an acceptable spatial resolution as was proposed by Loukitcheva et al. . In this con tribution we review the unique chromospheric obser vations at . mm with the BerkeleyIllinoisMaryland Array and the analysis of the intensity variations ex pected from the model of Carlsson Stein for mm wavelengths. We postulate the requirements for mm ob servations with the future instruments with emphasis on spatial and temporal resolution. Finally we discuss the prospects for chromospheric studies with ALMA. Results . Analysis of the BIMA observations at . mm The BerkeleyIllinoisMaryland Array BIMA operat ing at a wavelength of . mm frequency of GHzhas been the only interferometer in the mm range fre quently used for solar observations. The BIMA tele scopes are now part of the CARMA array which will also carry out such observations. With the BIMA data obtained in the years and we have constructed twodimensional maps of the solar chromosphere with a resolution of which represents the highest spatial resolution achieved so far at this wavelength for non are solar observations. The BIMA images have led to new insights in to chromospheric structure and to the detection of spatiallyresolved chromospheric oscil lations at mm wavelengths. The details of the restora tion procedure and extensive tests of the sensitivity of the BIMA data to the detection of dynamic signatures can be found in White et al. . With the currently available resolution the contrast of the brightness structures is evaluated to be up to of the quietsun brightness at . mm White et al. . However the similarity of brightness struc tures derived from the mm images and seen in other chromospheric emissions Fig. in spite of the dier ence in resolution of the images resolution of the UV images implies that the BIMA resolution is not enough to resolve the millimeter ne structure and ob servations with spatial resolution much higher than are required. A detailed analysis of the relations be tween the millimeter emission magnetic eld and other chromospheric diagnostics is in preparation. In the millimeter brightness we detected intensity oscillations with typical amplitudes of K in the range of periods from to seconds frequency range . mHz. We found a tendency toward short period oscillations in internetwork and longer periods in network regions in the quiet Sun which is in good agree ment with the results obtained at other wavelengths. At mm the inner parts of the chromospheric cells exhibit a behavior typical of the internetwork with the maxi mum of the Fourier power in the minute range how ever most of the oscillations are quasiperiodic show ing up in wave trains of nite duration lasting for typi cally wave periods see also Loukitcheva et al. . . Analysis of the CS model millimeter spectrum The response of the submillimeter and millimeter ra diation to a timeseries generated by Carlsson Stein CS was computed under the assumption of thermal freefree radiation by Loukitcheva et al. . The results are depicted in Fig. as the excess intensity as a func tion of wavelength and time. ... mm times Fig. Evolution of the Carlsson Stein model millimeter spec trum with time. Negative grey scale representing excess int ensity as a function of time and wavelength. Wave periods of approximately min can be clearly distinguished in the intensity at all considered wave lengths. Though the dominant frequency of the oscilla tions changes slightly with wavelength for all mm wave lengths it lies in the range of minutes. The dierence from one period of time to another can be explained by the presence of merging shocks during certain time intervals. The dierences in the light curves at dierent wavelengths are caused primarily by the dierence in the formation heights of the emitted radiation. In general the amplitudes of the oscillations compared to the radiation temperature are large in this sense mm wavelength radiation combines the advantages of the CO lines which mainly see the cool gas with those of atomic lines and UV continua which mainly sample the hot gas. On the whole the brightness temperatures are ex tremely timedependent at millimeter wavelengths fol lowing changes in the atmospheric parameters. With increasing wavelength the amplitude of the brightness oscillations grows signicantly reaches its maximum value at . mm expected to be of the quietSun brightness temperature and decreases rapidly towards longer wavelengths. Thus we can identify the range . . mm as the appropriate range of mm wavelengths at which one can expect the clearest signatures of dynamic eects. A careful look at the mm brightness spectrum as a function of time see Fig. reveals a time delay between the oscillations at long and short millimeter wavelengths. Hence it is possible to study wave modes traveling in the chromosphere by comparing submm with mm observations. Discussion The CS model predicts that spatially and temporally resolved observations should clearly exhibit the signa tures of the strong shock waves. However a direct com parison of the observational data products RMS val ues histogram skewness Fourier and wavelet spectra etc. referring to regions with weak magnetic eld like the quiet Sun internetwork with the corresponding prod ucts expected from the simulations of Carlsson Stein exhibits large dierences. In particular the RMS of the brightness temperature is nearly an order of magnitude larger in the model K at mm than in the ob servations K. Another dierence is the absence of longer periods in the model power spectrum. But these discrepancies do not rule out the CS models. On the one hand the model is one dimensional and hence does not predict a coherence length of the oscillations while on the other hand we are not able to resolve individual oscillating elements due to the limited spatial resolution of the observations. Consequently we estimated the inuence of the spa tial smearing on the model parameters of chromospheric dynamics and on the observed oscillatory power. Thus we conrmed that the very limited spatial resolution currently available hinders a clean separation between cells and network and typically both network and in ternetwork areas contribute to the recorded BIMA ra diation. From the analysis of the observational data it was found that power in all frequency ranges increases signicantly with improving resolution. Consistency be tween the power predicted by the CS model and the observed power is obtained if the coherence length of oscillating elements is on the order of . Our results are consistent with Wedemeyer et al. who computed the millimeter wave signature re sulting from the D simulations of Wedemeyer et al. . Although the D simulations suer from the fact that the radiative transfer of energy is computed en tirely in LTE which becomes a poor assumption at chromospheric heights the authors believe that the chro mospheric pattern and its temporal evolution is repre sentative of the nonmagnetic internetwork regions of the solar chromosphere. The simulations display a com plex D structure of the chromospheric layers which is highly dynamical on temporal scales of s and on spatial scales comparable to solar granulation which is in good agreement with the size of oscillating ele ments that we deduced. According to Wedemeyer et al. the chromospheric temperature structure is charac terized by a pattern of hot shock waves which originate from convective motions and cool gas lying between the shocks. The intensity distribution at mm wavelengths follows the pattern of the shocks in the chromosphere with a sub arcsecond size of the features associated with the shocks. All this complex and dynamic D structure can be deduced from observations at mm wavelengths with a suciently high spatial resolution of better than . Summary Simultaneous mmsubmm observations at dierent wave lengths can be used for the tomography of the solar atmosphere as radiation at the dierent wavelengths originates from dierent layers with the average for mation height increasing with wavelength. Such obser vations also provide a strong test of present and future models. However observations that might be able to uncover the nature of the chromosphere should meet the following requirements multiband observations in mmsubmm domain . . mm to address shock waves and chromospheric oscillation modes arcsecond spatial resolution to resolve ne structure temporal resolution better than a few seconds to follow its evolution in time FOV size of order of accurate absolute calibration of the observations Bas tian These requirements look very similar to the techni cal specication of the continuum observations with the Atacama Large Millimeter Array ALMA which rep resents an enormous advance over existing instrumenta tion operating at mmsubmm wavelengths. ALMA will produce images of the highest resolution available for the foreseeable future although the technical problem of sampling both large and small spatial scales simulta neously required for highquality imaging of the chro mosphere will remain a challenge and will be the most sensitive instrument operating at submmmm wavelengths. To summarize ALMA will be an extraordinarily pow erful instrument for studying the solar chromosphere. It will nally allow the mapping of the threedimensional thermal structure of the solar chromosphere which will be a real breakthrough in solar studies. Acknowledgements The use of BIMA for scientic research carried out at the University of Maryland is supported by NSF grant AST. Solar research at the University of Mary land is supported by NSF grant ATM and NASA grants NAG NAG NAG and NAG . 