 Entanglement entropy and timedependent QFTs . Review of holographic entanglement entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Entanglement entropy in timedependent states in QFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . Towards holographic entanglement entropy in timedepe ndent states . . . . . . Preview of covariant constructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Covariant holographic entanglement entropy and lightsh eets . Lightsheets and covariant constructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Expansions of null geodesics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . The covariant entanglement entropy prescription and ex tremal surface . . . . Relations between covariant constructions . Equivalence of WandYvia variational principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Equivalence of XandYon totally geodesic surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Consistency checks for timeindependent backgrounds . AdS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Expansions of null geodesics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Extremal surface and holographic entanglement entro py . . . . . . . .. Structure of the sign of expansions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Higher dimensional examples AdS d. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Innite strip in AdS d. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. dimensional ball in AdS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Area and expansion of surfaces on the lightcone . . . . . . . . . . . . . BTZ black hole nonrotating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Star in AdS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Stationary spacetimes the rotating BTZ geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. The holographic computation of entanglement entropy . . . . . . . . .. CFT and leftright asymmetric ensembles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Comments on the minmax construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Entanglement entropy and timedependence . VaidyaAdS spacetimes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Extremal surface in VaidyaAdS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Null expansions in VaidyaAdS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Timedependent entanglement entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Perturbative proof of entropy increase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Relation to the second law of black hole thermodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . Other examples of timedependent backgrounds . Wormholes in AdS and entanglement entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Entanglement entropy of the AdS bubble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Discussion A Covariant construction of causallymotivated surface Z A. Discrepancy in AdS dford . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A. Dimensional static bulk geometries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A. Use of Zto bound the entanglement entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B Null expansions and extremal surfaces B. Denition of extrinsic curvature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B. Extremal surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B. Expansions of null geodesics relation to extremal surf aces . . . . . . . . . . C Details of perturbative analysis in VaidyaAdS backgroun d Introduction One of the important questions in quantum eld theories is to understand the number of operative degrees of freedom in the theory at a given scale . In conventional RG parlance this is measured by the Zamolodchikovs cfunction in two d imensions which at the critical points takes on the value of the central charge. One believes this picture to persist in higher dimensions in particular there ought to exist some analog of a cfunction in higher dimensional quantum eld theories of interest. Clearly the re is a welldened notion of the central charges for conformal eld theories in d which may quantify the total degrees of freedom. However this interpretation in terms of the deg rees of freedom has not yet been rigorously proved except in two dimensions. Measuring degr ees of freedom in timedependent backgrounds is an especially important open problem. A deta iled understanding of this issue is very important for making precise the notion of holo graphy in quantum gravity. For example in the context of string theory in unstable backgro unds with closed string tachyons one expects that as the tachyon condenses the number of degr ees of freedom does change to verify this expectation it is crucial to have a precise n otion of the timedependent degrees of freedom. A simple way to get a measure of the degrees of freedom is to cou ple the system to a heat bath and study its thermal properties in particular it s entropy. However we could also ask the equally important question suppose we concentrate on a particular region of the background spacetime on which the QFT is dened and ask what i s the correct measure of the operative degrees of freedom in that region even at zero temperature. One important aspect of this is captured by the entanglement entropy whic h provides a measure of how the degrees of freedom localized in that region interact are e ntangled with the rest of the theory. In a sense the entanglement entropy is a measure of th e eective operative degrees of freedom i.e. those that are active participants in the dynamics in a giv en region of the background geometry. Refer to for a short review of entanglement entropy in QFT. Consider a QFT dened on a spacetime manifold Mthe peculiar choice of notation for the background will become clear momentarily and assume t hatMallows the foliation by timeslices NtasMNtRt. We wish to focus on a region AtNtat a xed timet. Denote also the complement of Atwith respect to NtbyBtso that At BtNt. This procedure divides the Hilbert space for the total syste mHinto a direct product of two Hilbert spaces HAandHBfor the two subsystems corresponding to the regions AtandBt respectively i.e.HtotHA HB. In this setup one measure of the number of degrees of freedom associated with region or subsystem Atis given by the entanglement entropy SAt. It is dened as the von Neumann entropy SAtt TrAtt logAtt associated with the reduced density matrix Att Tr Btott obtained by taking a trace of the density matrix tott for the total system at time tover the Hilbert space HB. Notice that the entanglement entropy dened in this way is manifestly timedependent. Be low we will suppress the index twhich shows the timedependence when we consider a static sy stem where SAtt does not depend on t. In the same way we can dene the entanglement entropy SBtt for the other subsystem Bt. In general SAtt is dierent from SBtt. However they are equivalent if the total system is described by a pure state tabacketihtAtabacketiht Btabacketiht where the total and reduced density matrices are given by tott tabacketihtabacketlettandAtt Tr Bttabacketihtabacketlett respectively. In a two dimensional CFT we can analytically calculate the e ntanglement entropy for arbitrary choice of the subsystem Atas shown recently in generalizing the previously known result . Moreover an analogue of the Zamolodchikovs ctheorem called entropic ctheorem has been shown in see also . However in higher dimensions it is rather dicult to obtain analytical results for generic At. Its state of the art is reviewed in from the viewpoint of the QFT. Recently entanglement entropies of various and dim ensional condensed matter systems have been actively investigated in order to underst and zero temperature quantum phase transitions . In this context entanglement entropy plays an important role of an order parameter of the phase transition. For examp le in a material exhibiting topological ordering such as the system with anyons in frac tional quantum Hall eect correlation functions are not useful since the theory is top ological. Instead we need a quantity which probes nonlocal information like fractional statis tics of anyons. It turns out that the entanglement entropy can do this job elegantly because it i s dened nonlocally . As already mentioned one of the important reasons to be inte rested in issues related to measuring degrees of freedom has to do with quantum gravity a nd the notion of holography. Roughly speaking the holographic principle states that th e number of degrees of freedom in a quantum theory of gravity scales with the area of the syst em in contrast to standard QFTs where the entropy is extensive and scales with the volum e . In string theory a natural realization of the holographic principle i s manifested by the AdSCFT correspondence which gives us a precise map between a quantum gravity theor y on an asymptotically AdS spacetime Mand an ordinary QFT on the conformal boundary M ofM. In this context we can ask whether there is a gravitational d ual of the entanglement entropy associated with a subsystem of the boundary QFT. Ref er to for earlier pioneering works. Interestingly for a long time it has been known that the lead ing ultraviolet divergent contribution to the entanglement entropy SAin QFTs is proportional to the area of the boundary Aof the subsystem Aknown as the area law of entanglement entropy . This means that unlike the thermal entropy the entanglemen t entropy is not an extensive quantity.Instead this property looks very analogous to the holograp hic principle and the area law of BekensteinHawking black hole entropy. This fac t strongly suggests a simple For systems at nite temperature the entanglement entropy also includes a nite extensive term which is proportional to the thermal entropy. gravitational interpretation of entanglement entropy in Q FTs via a holographic relation. Recently a geometric procedure has been discovered to comp ute the entanglement en tropy of a subsystem A Nin the context of the AdSCFT correspondence . The construction which we review in proceeds as follows given a region AinNat a xed time of a static asymptotically AdS spacetime we con struct a minimal surface S i.e. a surface whose area takes the minimum value in the bulk spa cetime Mwhich is anchored at the boundary AofA. The area of this minimal surface in the bulk Planck units provides an accurate measure of the entanglement of th e degrees of freedom in Awith those in its spatial complement B. This prescription has been veried by several nontrivial checks as well as a direct proof . This holographic prescription provides a simple way to calculate the entanglement entropy in spacet imes with no temporal evo lution. Moreover this holographic relation is successful ly applied to the braneworld black holes and deSitter spaces as well which enable us to interpret the horizon entropy with quantum corrections as the entanglement entro py see also recent discussions . The geometric perspective provided by the minimal surface c onstruction has many ad vantages especially for QFTs in dimensions d since there are relatively few techniques to calculate the entanglement entropy in interacting eld t heories. Furthermore herein lies the hope to address an interesting question related to entan glement entropy namely its be haviour as a function of time in an interacting QFT. In this co ntext it is important to note that since the entanglement entropy is not an extensive quan tity unlike the conventional thermodynamic entropy a priori it does not have to obey the Second Law. Nevertheless it seems natural to expect that when we consider an interacting QFT the degrees of freedom in region Awill interact with those in Band consequently get more entangled thereby in creasing the entanglement entropy SA. Indeed the following theorem is wellknown let t tR be a one parameter family of positive linear transformatio ns of a Hilbert space H such that they constitute a semigroup then StS. This monotonicity prop erty essentially comes from the concavity of logas a function of . In the setup of this theorem we interpret tas the irreversible and nonunitary timeevolution such as a quan tum analogue of the Markov process. Also is taken to be the reduced density matrix A. On the other hand in the case of a unitary time evolution of an excited state the entropy for the total system remains the same while the entanglement entropy for a subsystem can change. Explicit examples are borne out in the analysis of where the authors analyse the situation in two dimensional eld theories. However th e general story is far from clear and one would like to get a better handle on the problem. Hence instead of examining timedependence of entanglement entropy from the QFT point of view we would like to Here a positive matrix is dened to be a Hermitian matrix whos e trace is positive. A positive linear transformation is the one which maps a positive matrix to ano ther positive matrix. Also we require that it does not change the identity and satises Tr t Tr for any density matrix on H. analyse it using the holographic prescription mentioned ab ove. In the context of the AdSCFT correspondence the prescript ion for calculating the en tanglement entropy from the area of a minimal surface suers from one stumbling block the minimal surfaces are usually associated with Euclidean geo metries. In Lorentzian spacetimes one has trouble dening a minimal surface because by wiggli ng a spacelike surface in the time direction one can make its area arbitrarily small. For static spacetimes this problem is usually avoided by Wick rotating and working in the Euclid ean setup or equivalently by restricting attention to a constant time slice. But for the m ost interesting dynamical ques tions this method is not applicable. However this does not necessarily mean that the notion of the geometric dual of the entanglement entropy cannot be d ened in general. Indeed as we have explicitly seen entanglement entropy is wellden ed in terms of the timedependent density matrix and therefore has to admit a welldened hol ographic dual. By welldened we mean generally covariant. Hence our strategy for examin ing the entanglement entropy dual in a general timedependent scenario will be to rst nd a suitable fully covariant generalization of the minimalsurface proposal and then t o use this covariant holographic entanglement entropy denitionto nd the timevariation in the specic cases of interest. To motivate the possibility of generalizing the dual of enta nglement entropy in time dependent scenarios it is useful to think of the analogy wit h a spacelike geodesic which in fact describes the minimal surface for a dimensional bu lk. In Euclidean spacetimes spacelike geodesics are local minima of the proper length fu nctional. However in Lorentzian spacetimes they are extrema of the proper length. Likewise we expect that the natural analog of the Euclidean minimal surface to be an extremal surface denoted by Wbelow which is a saddle point of the proper area functional. This ex pectation is indeed realized and forms the primary result of this paper. For stationary bulk geometries with a timelike Killing eld the entanglement entropy is likewise time independent and there exists a canonical fol iation of the bulk spacetime Mby spacelike surfaces. In a generic timedependent backgroun d there is no preferred canonical foliation in the bulk. In contrast for a QFT on a xed backgro und we do have a natural notion of time. The issue from a gravitational standpoint is then whether a given spacelike foliation in Mproducttext tNtRt extends in a unique fashion into the bulk to provide us with the requisite foliation of M. If the answer is in the armative then we can use the spacelike slices thus constructed and nd minimal surfaces localized within them. Indeed even in timedependent geometries it is plausible t hat there is a natural slicing of the bulk spacetime M we can dene maximal area codimension one spacelike sli ces by the vanishing trace of the extrinsic curvature on . Sin ce each is spacelike we In what follows to simplify the terminology somewhat we wi ll sometimes denote this as simply co variant entanglement entropy it should be clear from cont ext when we mean the gravitational dual and when we are talking about the QFT quantity. now have a welldened prescription for nding a minimalar ea bulk codimension two surface localized within and anchored at A. We denote this minimal surface on maximal slice by X. The surface Xis covariantly dened and like Wit reduces correctly to the requisite minimal surface for static spacetimes thereby p roviding another candidate for the covariant entanglement entropy. However as we will see to make contact with a holographic perspective we will have to elevate the notion of the maximal slice to that of a totally geodesic codimension one slice. In this paper we examine the two constructions WandXmotivated above and propose a more appealing covariant generalization Yof the geometric construction of to compute entanglement entropy in general asymptotically Ad S spacetimes. The basic idea behind our proposal is to exploit the lightsheet construct ion of the covariant entropy bounds of Bousso . Lightsheets are a natural concept in Lorentzian spaceti mes and serve to single out a codimension two spacelike surface of the bul k manifold whose area bounds the entropy passing through its lightsheet in the context of th e covariant entropy bounds. We will denote this surface whose construction we focus on in w hat follows by Y. The minimal surface Xconstruction also singles out a codimension two spacelike surface albeit by rst picking a spacelike foliation and then nding a codimensio n one surface within the leaves of the foliation. It is thus natural to expect that there is an in timate relation between the light sheet construction and minimal surfaces and indeed we will s how that they are equivalent if a given time slice is totally geodesic. We hope a similar argu ment can be applied to more general spacetimes with boundaries allowing bulk nontriv ial minimal surfaces. A natural way to motivate the lightsheet construction is to consider a cuto eld theory in asymptotically AdS spacetimes. The dual description of t he bulk is then in terms of a cut o eld theory coupled to dynamical gravity on the cuto sur face. Due to the gravitational dynamics in the boundary eld theory the entropy associated with any codimension two surface bounds the amount of information that passes throug h the lightsheet associated with that surface. The spacelike codimension two surface c an be taken to be the boundary Aof the subsystem A. Aided by this construction we can extend the lightsheets t hat live on the cuto surface into bulk lightsheets and ask what is t he spacelike surface in the bulk associated with these Imposing the constraint that the spa celike codimension twosurface inMbe required to have boundary AonMso that lightsheets can end on it we can nd the bulk surface we were looking for. While this motivates the proposal for a covariantization of the geometric prescription for nding the entanglement entropy in terms of lightsheet s in this formulation it is not very constructive. There is in fact a simple algorithm for ac tually constructing the bulk surface Yin question nd the spacelike codimension two surface who se boundary coincides Note that codimension two surface in the cuto boundary co rresponds to a codimension three surface in the full bulk so here the requisite surface has the same di mension as Arather than A see Table in Appendix A. withAonMwith the constraint that the trace of the null extrinsic curv atures i.e.the null expansions associated with the two null normals to Yvanish. For smooth surfaces parameterized by two functions this leads in general to some partial dierential equations which can be solved to obtain a precise construction of the su rface. Furthermore we can show that this denition of Yis actually equivalent to the requirement that Yis the co dimension two extremal surface in the Lorentzian manifold w ith the specied boundary condition. In other words YW. Thus this construction naturally reduces to the minimal surface prescription of . As a check in a simple nonstatic example we analytically co mpute the holographic en tanglement entropy of three dimensional rotating BTZ bla ck holes employing our covariant prescription. The result precisely agrees with the entropy calculated in the dual two dimen sional CFT. Furthermore we also argue that the prescriptio n of nding the surface Yusing the vanishing null extrinsic curvatures can be derived from a bulkboundary relation a la. GKPW relation for the AdSCFT correspondence. One can set up a variationa l problem by exploiting these ideas and show that the action pr inciple in gravity singles out the extremal surface. Once we have a covariant prescription for computing the Lore ntzian extremal surface inMwe can ask the basic questions that motivated the investigat ion in the rst place such as whether the entanglement entropy has denite monoto nicity properties vis a vis temporal evolution. To address this issue we discuss the exa mple of a spacetime background involving a collapse scenario leading to black hole formati on the spacetime is modeled by a VaidyaAdS spacetime. Due to the formation of a black hole i n the bulk we expect that the dual eld theory on the boundary thermalizes. The therma lization is expected to lead to an increase in the entanglement entropy the ergodic mixi ng of the boundary degrees of freedom would suggest that the degrees of freedom localized in region Ainteract more with those in Band thereby one expects that the entanglement entropy grows in time. The bulk computation using the lightsheet prescription bears out t his picture nicely. Another example where a covariant formulation is necessary is the case of wormhole spacetimes in AdS with two disconnected boundaries . Even though the two CFTs on the two disconnected boundaries look decoupled from each ot her there are nonvanishing correlation functions between two theories in the dual grav ity calculation as pointed out in . We would like to present a possible resolution to this puzz le by computing the entanglement entropy between the two CFTs. The outline of the paper is as follows we begin in with a quick review of the minimal surface proposal for static spacetimes and the reasons to ex pect a covariant generalization of this picture. We then proceed in to motivate the lightsheet construction for time dependent backgrounds. We present a manifestly covariant h olographic entanglement en tropy in this section which is the most important conclusio n of this paper. We explain how this construction can be naturally motivated from a variati onal principle and its connection to the bulkboundary relation within the AdSCFT context in . Inwe illustrate the calculations of the entanglement entropy using our covaria nt proposal and demonstrate the consistent agreement with the minimal surface prescriptio n of . We also examine rotating BTZ black holes which are stationary but nonstat ic and show that our covariant proposal precisely reproduces the entanglement entropy co mputed from the CFT side. In we discuss the explicit timedependent situation of gravit ational collapse and argue that the entanglement entropy increases monotonically in this cont ext. We discuss other interesting timedependent backgrounds such as AdS wormholes and bubb les of nothing in and end with a discussion in . In Appendix Awe present a simpler covariant construction which whilst not reproducing the correct minimal surface in gener al is nevertheless interesting in that it provides a bound on the entanglement entropy. In Appe ndixBwe give a proof of equivalence between the vanishing of null expansions and th e extremal surface. In Appendix Cwe presents some details of the calculations of the timedep endent entanglement entropy in the VaidyaAdS background using perturbative methods. Entanglement entropy and timedependent QFTs As mentioned in the Introduction our main aim is to nd a cova riant prescription for calcu lating the entanglement entropy associated with a given reg ion of the boundary conformal eld theory. We begin by reviewing the minimal surface propo sal of which pro vides the rst step of geometrization of entanglement entro py in the AdSCFT context and which will serve to set up the background and notation for the subsequent generalization to nonstationary spacetimes. We then argue that entanglem ent entropy remains a well dened concept in timevarying states in the eld theory an d motivate a correspondingly welldened dual geometric construction which would accom modate any timedependence in the bulk. Finally we remark that there are in fact many such p lausible constructions and give an overview of those we focus on in the present paper. . Review of holographic entanglement entropy Consider a d dimensional asymptotically AdS spacetime Mwith conformal boundary M. For the present we will concentrate on the static case when Madmits a timelike Killing eldparenleftbig tparenrightbig. On the boundary MofM which serves as the background for the dual eld theory time translations are generated byparenleftbig tparenrightbigwhich is simply the pullback of the bulk Killing eld. Thus we can naturally foliate the boun daryMby spacelike surfaces which are normal to this timelike Killing eld so that Mproducttext tNtRt. Consider then a particular leaf Nof this foliation which we wish to divide into into two region sAandBso thatNA B . The boundary between these regions is denoted as AB assuming thatNis a compact manifold. Note that Ais ddimensional and Ais therefore ddimensional. For a QFT on Mwe can calculate the entanglement entropy associated with t he region A. Since there are innitely many degrees of freedom in an ordi nary QFT it is known that the entanglement entropy suers from an ultraviolet diverg ence. The standard result is that the leading divergence of entanglement entropy scales as th e area of the boundary Abetween the two regions or subsystems as they are conventionally referred to in the entanglement entropy literature . The intuitive reason of this area law for the divergent par t is that the most entangled degrees of freedom are the high energ y ones localized within an innitesimal neighbourhood of A. Essentially SAAreaA d . where we have indicated the leading divergent behaviour is a constant factor. The innitesimally small parameter denotes the ultraviolet divergence i.e.lattice spacing. The subleading terms contain slower power law or logarithmi c divergences apart from nite terms which are of interest. Since we work within the AdSCFT context we can ask whether th e entanglement entropy for the boundary QFT can be calculated using a purely geometr ic construction in the bulk this question was answered in the armative in . The essential idea behind the picture of is the following by virtue of time translation invariance the boundary spacelike foliation naturally extends into the bulk to prov ide a canonical spacelike foliationproducttext tNtofM. On a given spacelike slice in the Mwe are instructed to construct a minimal area surface which ends on A N. This is a well dened problem and the minimal surface which is a spacelike surface of vanishing mean curva ture is guaranteed to exist due to the Euclidean signature of the bulk spacelike slice. Thus given the minimal surface Smin the entanglement entropy associated with region Ais SAAreaSmin Gd N. . Note that the minimal surface Sis a codimension two surface in the bulk spacetime Mby virtue of being a codimension one submanifold of a particul ar leaf of the spacelike foliation. . Entanglement entropy in timedependent states in QFT For states in QFT with trivial timedependence one can calc ulate the entanglement entropy in a conventional manner by looking at the decomposition of t he total Hilbert space on a given timeslice. The holographic perspective of this is ca ptured by the minimal surface pre scription indicated in .. It is clear from the outset that in QFT nothing prevents us f rom considering explicitly timevarying states and computing entanglement entropy for subsys tems thereof. It is easy to give a pathintegral prescriptio n for computing the entanglement entropy in these circumstances and we outline the basic meth odology below. Consider a quantum eld theory in a timedependent backgrou nd. Its evolution in time is described by the timedependent Hamiltonian Ht. A state at the time ttis dened bytabacketiht. It is related to the state at the time tvia the familiar formula tabacketihtTexpparenleftbigg iintegraldisplayt tdt Htparenrightbigg tabacketiht. . In the path integral formulation the ket state tabacketihtis equivalently constructed by the pathintegralfromttott t x integraldisplaytt tDeiSt xx . where we represent all elds by . On the other hand the bra state abacketlettis expressed as follows t x integraldisplayt ttDeiSt xx. . Clearly they satisfy i ttabacketihtHttabacketiht i tabacketlettabacketlettHt. . Let us rst assume the total system is described by a pure stat etabacketihtwith unit norm at vanishing temperature. Then the total density matrix is g iven by tott tabacketihtabacketlett . and its timeevolution is dictated by the vonNeumann equat ion itott t Ht tott. . In the gravitational context we will consider interesting e xamples with event horizons. These will be described in the dual CFT by a mixed state and so we need to formulate the theory by using only the density matrix tott. However even in such cases we expect to have an equivalent description in terms of a pure state by assumin g another CFT sector hidden inside the horizons as in the SchwarzschildAdS case or other degrees of freedom in more general circumstances as in the examples of . Thus the assumption . does not exclude the choice of density matrices so long as we can puri fy the state by passage to a enlarged Hilbert space which in the geometry correspond s to another sector behind the horizon. Divide the total Hilbert space into a direct product of two Hi lbert spaces at time t HtotHA HB. In the quantum eld theory this is realized by dividing the total space By employing the conventional i prescription we can project the asymptotic state tabacketihtto the ground state. manifold Nat a xed time into two parts AandB. Then the entanglement entropy SAt at time tis dened as follows SAt TrAAt logAt . where At is the reduced density matrix At Tr Btott Tr Btabacketihtabacketlett. . We always normalize any reduced density matrices such that their trace is one i.e. Tr . In order to express SAt in the path integral formalism we need to rst describe the reduced density matrix in that formalism see also . Taking the trace in the Hilbert space HBin . is equivalent to partially gluing two boundaries in . and . along B. Thus it is described by the pathintegral over the whole spa cetime with an innitesimally small slit along Aat a xed time t At Zintegraldisplayt tDeiSproductdisplay xAt xxt xx . where is an innitesimal positive constant and we also dened Zintegraldisplayt tDeiS. . Given the denition of the trace of the density matrix Ain . it is easy to calculate the trace Tr An. This is calculated by integrating the products of pathint egrals AtAtAtnn . successively with the identications andn. In other words this is essentially the partition function Znt on the singular manifold Mnwhich is dened by the ncopies of the total manifold Mglued along Aat the xed time t Tr AtnZnt Zn. . Knowledge of the partition function Znt on the singular manifold then allows us to compute the entanglement entropy using SAt nlog Tr Atnvextendsinglevextendsinglevextendsinglevextendsingle n logZlogZnt nvextendsinglevextendsinglevextendsinglevextendsingle n. . . Towards holographic entanglement entropy in timedepe ndent states The discussion of entanglement entropy in timedependent Q FT states in the previous section makes it clear that there is no a priori obstruction in thinking about this issue from a eld theoretic perspective. In the AdSCFT context we would then like to ask whether the holographic entanglement entropy proposal of can be generalized to timedependent scenarios. In particular can we nd a suitable generalizat ion of the minimal surface which is fully covariant The answer is of course yes and in fact we will propose several covariant constructions in this and the next section and examine the r elations between them. To motivate the existence of a suitable covariantly wellde ned surface we startby indicating the construction of the surface which we will den ote as X which is the most naive generalization of the minimal surface in the case of static b ulk spacetimes. Consider a time dependent version of the AdSCFT correspondence where the b oundary theory is taken to be in a timevarying state on a xed background M. The corresponding bulk geometry M will have an explicit timedependence and hence no timelike Killing eld. Since the metric onMis nondynamical in the boundary we can choose a foliation b y equal time slices by picking our time coordinate such that it implements the na tural Hamiltonian evolution of the eld theory so that MNtRt. We can choose to consider a region AtNt on a given time slice as in .and compute the entanglement entropy using the path integral prescription. The question then is what is the anal og of this computation from a bulk perspective Naively one would expect that the minimal surface prescrip tion for computing the holo graphic entanglement entropy should go through. However t his cannot quite be the case as mentioned in in Lorentzian spacetimes one has to be careful about denin g suitable minimal area surfaces due to the indenite metric signature . The crucial issue in a Lorentzian setting is the fact that gen erically the equaltime foliation on the boundary Mdoes not necessarily lead to a canonical i.e. symmetry motivated foliation of the bulk M. Supposing for the moment that a natural foliation was singled out we could then compute the holographic entangle ment entropy by rst picking the preferred spacelike slice NtofMgiven by extending the slice from M. OnNtthe induced metric is spacelike and the notion of the minimal surface is w ell dened. The holographic prescription then amounts to nding a minimal surface S N such that SMA. The above observation suggests that we look for a covariantl y dened spacelike slice of the bulk Nt anchored at Nt which reduces to the constant tslice for static bulk. Generically while one expects no preferrednatural time s licing of M it is plausible that for asymptotically AdS spacetimes one has a preferred folia tion by zeromean curvature slicesi.e. slices with vanishing trace of extrinsic curvature. Physi cally each of these slices corresponds to the maximal area spacelike slice through the bulk anchored at the boundary Those readers who would like to know the nal conclusion imme diately are advised to skip to the covariant entanglement entropy proposal I and II in .and.. In general any constant mean curvature slice of the bulk pro vides a covariantly welldened surface however when this constant is nonzero it doesnt satisfy t he requirement of reducing to the constant tslice in static bulk. sliceN.We denote the leaves of this maximalarea foliation by t. One might worry that the maximalarea slice is not well dene d because an area of a given surface can always be increased by crumpling or wigg ling the surface in the spatial directions however here the crucial point is that our slic e has codimension one extending over all the available spatial directions and therefore al lows no room for wiggling. An other possible concern is the fact that in asymptotically Ad S spacetimes the area of any spacelike slice is manifestly innite. However this is the familiar problem of regulating the lengthsareasvolumes in AdS which we know how to deal w ith. Below we will use a simple background subtraction technique and regulate all quantities by subtracting o the corresponding values in pure AdS. Provided we have this special maximal spacelike slice tthrough the bulk we proceed as outlined above on this slice we construct the minimalare a surface anchored at At. This amounts to a minimax algorithm for the holographic entangl ement entropy nd a maximal slice in the bulk which agrees with the spacelike foliation o fMand in that maximal slice nd a minimal surface X. In this setup one may obtain a natural proposal that the are a of Xthen gives the entanglement entropy SAAreaX Gd N. . Note that the surface Xby construction satises the three basic prerequisites fo r being a candidate dual of the entanglement entropy of A it is covariantly welldened it is anchored atA and it reduces to the requisite minimal surface when the bul k spacetime is static. However we will argue that this prescription doesnt follo w naturally from a holographic viewpoint and needs to be nessed slightly to make contact wi th the holographic perspective. Thus rather than stopping at our candidate surface X in the next section we will propose another candidate surface Y as a more natural dual of the entanglement entropy. In fact this holographic formulation will provide a more straightf orward algorithmic construction of the requisite surface Y. Our starting point is motivated by the idea of lightsheets introduced in the context of covariant entropy bounds in gravitational theories. We will argue that the prescription which we nd in terms of lightsheets reduces t o the intuitive picture presented above modulo some subtleties with the added bonus of provi ding an explicit equation for the extremal surface. . Preview of covariant constructions Before delving into the details of these constructions we b riey list them with a short summary of our nal conclusion to orient the reader and x th e notation. In all cases the We thank Doug Eardley Gary Horowitz and Don Marolf for disc ussions on this issue. requisite surface is a codimension two bulk surface which i s anchored on the boundary at At. In addition all of these constructions are fully covarian t they do not depend on any particular choice of coordinates and therefore are phy sically welldened. Also these surfaces are mutually closely related although dierent s ymbols are used to indicate dierent constructions this is not meant to imply that the surfaces t hus constructed are necessarily distinct. In part of what follows we will examine the specic relations between them. W extremal surface given by a saddle point of the area action . In dimensional bulk this is simply the spacelike geodesic through the bulk conne cting the points At. We return to discuss this surface in .. X minimalarea surface on maximalarea codimension one slice of the bulk. The construction was motivated in .and we will discuss some subtleties and generaliza tions in .. In particular we will show that Xcoincides with the extremal surface WifXis situated on a totally geodesic spacelike surface. Y surface wherefrom the null expansions along the requisite future and past light sheets vanish. This will be the construction we primarily fo cus on. In fact we propose two constructions Ymin Atin. and Yextin.. We will later see that Ymin Atand Yextare equivalent to the extremal surface Wwe present a proof in the Appendix B. Z causal construction discussed mainly in Appendix A minimalarea surface on the boundary of the causal wedge of the boundary domain of dep endence of At. Our main claim of this paper will be that the covariant hologr aphic entanglement entropy is obtained from the area of the surface WY. In a generic timedependent spacetime we will nd that another surface Xdeviates slightly from WY. We will also conrm thatWX andYall reduce to the minimal surface in static bulk spacetime h owever this is not necessarily the case for Z. Nevertheless Zwill be useful because as we motivate in Appendix A it provides a bound on the entanglement entropy and is comp utationally simpler to nd. Covariant holographic entanglement entropy and lightsh eets . Lightsheets and covariant constructions To motivate the natural covariant generalization of a holog raphic entanglement entropy proposal it is useful to recall the construction of covaria nt entropy bounds in gravitational theories. The main issue in dening covariant entropy bound s was to put a bound on the entropyinformation passing through a given region of s pacetime in a fashion that is independent of the choice of coordinates or slicing. A clear formulation of covariant entropy bounds was achieved by Bousso using the concept of lightsheets. A discussion of this entropy bound applied to the AdSCFT which stimulat es our arguments below can be found in . M SLight Rays LightSheet LS Fig. A lightsheet LSfor a codimension two spacelike surface S. The null geodesics on the lightsheet are converging i.e. the expansion is nonpositive. Before proceeding to discuss the relevance of lightsheets for calculating entanglement entropy let us review the concept of a lightsheet. Given an y codimension two spacelike surface Sin a spacetime manifold M we construct four congruences of futurepast null geodesics from the surface in ingoing and outgoing direct ions. A lightsheet LSforS corresponds to those null geodesic congruences for which th e expansion of the null geodesics is nonpositive denite we will explain the denition of th e expansion of null geodesics in the next subsection physically we require that the cross s ectional area at a constant ane parameter along the congruence does not increase. The null geodesics along the lightsheet are converging and will eventually develop caustics at any such point the lightsheet gets cut o. According to the covariant entropy bound Bousso bou nd the entropy or amount of information SLSthat can pass through a lightsheet i.e.the integral of the entropy ux on the lightsheet is bounded by the area of spacelike surface as follows SLSAreaS GN. . We would like to propose that the correct generalization of t he holographic entanglement entropy is in terms of these lightsheets. One can motivate t his claim by analyzing the QFT coupled to gravity as in a braneworld setup i.e. RS II model . Indeed the Bekenstein Hawking entropy of braneworld black holes can be interpret ed as an entanglement entropy in this setup as discussed in . Consider the setup of the AdS dCFT dwith an explicit UV cuto in the bulk z where zis the AdS radial coordinate chosen such that the boundary i s atz . We choose Poincar e coordinates for AdS dwith the radius of AdS set to unity for simplicity ds zparenleftigg dtdzdsummationdisplay idx iparenrightigg . . The UV cuto is innitesimally small and is interpreted as a lattice spac ing. This setup is equivalent to the one of the braneworld where a very weak gra vity exists on the ddimensional brane located on the cuto surface. The Newtons constant f or the brane will be taken to beGd N. By the AdSCFT correspondence this setup is dual to the bul kd dimensional AdS spacetime with the cuto and a bulk Newtons constant Gd Nrelated via the rule Gd N Gd Nintegraltext dxdradicalbig gdRd integraltext dxdradicalbig gdRd Gd Nintegraldisplay dz zd dd Gd N.. Since the braneworld theory has gravity coupled to the QFT we can consider the Bousso bound for the ddimensional boundary theory. We then would like to translat e the compu tation of this bound holographically into a calculation fro m the viewpoint of the bulk d dimensional gravity. In the boundary the calculation would proceed by nding the light sheets associated with the particular region Awe want to focus on. Since in the boundary eld theory the lightsheets bound the region which is relev ant for any entropy bound the corresponding bulk prescription should likewise include n o more than this region. A natu ral expectation is then that the codimension two surface in the boundary has a canonical extension into the bulk spacetime in such a way that the assoc iated bulk lightsheets are anchored on the boundary lightsheets under the appropriat e restriction. Of course there are potentially many surfaces that satisfy this requirement w e will then pick the one that gives the strongest bound on the bulk entropy. Our claim then amoun ts to the statement that the dual bulk entropy bounds can be found by extending the bounda ry lightsheet which was employed to nd the covariant entropy bound in the boundary t heory into the bulk. One intriguing consequence of this proposal is that the bulk results include quantum corrections while the boundary results do not as is famili ar in AdSCFT. Let us see how these quantum corrections look like in a specic example. We are interested in the Bousso bound for the spacelike surface Sdi.e.ad dimensional sphere with the radius lin theddimensional braneworld. We choose Aa submanifold on a timeslice ttsuch that ASd. At the classical level we obtain the entropy bound SAAreaA Gd N. . In order to take into account the quantum corrections we ext end the lightsheet from A Sdto that from half of a d dimensional sphere SAin the bulk AdS. Then we obtain the quantum corrected entropy bound SAAreaSA Gd NAreaA Gd Nbracketleftbigg lparenleftbigg logparenleftbiggl parenrightbigg const .parenrightbiggbracketrightbigg AreaA Gd N. . The nite dierence between the above quantum and classical entropy bound is analogous to the Casimir energy. An alternate way to explain our motivation for considering l ightsheets is to think of the entanglement entropy as being directly related to the ther modynamic entropy computed by the Bousso bound. More precisely we would like to claim th atthe entanglement entropy saturates the Bousso bound in the setup of the AdSCFT correspondence or the related braneworld version. While the claim that entanglement ent ropy is related to lightsheets isa priori very surprising the example of the static AdS background st rongly suggests this interpretation see also . Similarly the bulkboundary relation so called GKPW relation in the AdSCFT correspondence leads to the same conclusio n. A weaker version of this claim will be that the entanglement entropy satises the Bousso bound . What we have argued in the above is summarized as the following pro posal for direct holographic computation of entanglement entropy. A Covariant Entanglement Entropy Proposal I Consider the usual AdSCFT setup in a d dimensional asymptotically AdS spacetime Mwithddimensional boundary M. We will choose the boundary Mto be either RdorRSd in the following we usually assume Poincar e coordinates for simplicity. As explained earlier at time t we divide the d dimensional space of the boundary theory into AtandBt. The boundary Atbetween these domains will play an important role. Note that Atis ad dimensional spacelike surface in M. Now we can construct the upper and lower lightsheets L tandL tfor the spacelike surface At. This can be done in a straightforward manner using the confo rmally at metric onM. We then consider extensions L tof the two lightsheets L tinto bulk such that they are the lightsheets in Mwith respect to a d dimensional spacelike surface YtL tL t as in the left gure of Fig. . Given this we propose that the possibly timedependent e ntanglement entropy for the subsystem Atin the dual boundary theory is given by SAtt minYArea Yt Gd N. . Here min YArea Yt denotes the minimum of the area over the set of Yas we vary the form ofL tsatisfying the above mentioned conditions with L txed. We denote this minimal area surface Ymin At. Essentially we then have the analog of . SAtt AreaYmin At Gd N. . L YAALightsheet L Lightsheet LYA LAY Y MMLightsheet Fig. A lightsheet construction in AdS CFT . . Expansions of null geodesics As we have already seen the denition of the lightsheet inv olves the expansions of null geodesics. Since this quantity plays a crucial role in the di scussions below we will pause to explain its denition and properties for details refer to e.g. . Given a codimension two surface Sin a spacetime manifold specied by two constraints x x . we can dene two oneforms ii . Nondegeneracy requires that there be two linearly independent oneforms and so has to be a null oneform for two distinct values of . Using this information one can construct two nullvectors N that are orthogonal to the surface of interest N g. . We can x the null vectors to be normalized such that N N g. . In terms of N and the induced metric hon the surface Swe can write down the null extrinsic curvatures h h N. . The expansion of an orthogonal null geodesic congruence to t he surface is then given by the trace of the null extrinsic curvature . . Because we are interested in null geodesic congruences the re is no natural scale associated with the Physically the null expansions measure the rate of change o f the area of the codimension two surface Spropagated along the null vectors. Let us express the embedd ing map from S to the spacetime MbyX where denote the coordinates on S. Under an innitesimal deformation X orthogonal to Swith xed boundary conditions the change in the area ofSis obtained from the value of the expansions see e.g. Areaintegraldisplay SN XN X . where the proportionality constant is positive. Therefore determining the sign of the null expansions is equivalent to nding whether the area increases or decrea ses when we perform an innitesimal deformation. In addition . clearly shows that the surfaces Swith vanishing null expansions are extremal surfaces Wi.e. saddle points of the area functional. An explicit proof of this is given in Appendix B. . The covariant entanglement entropy prescription and ex tremal surface In.we presented a covariant proposal for calculating the holog raphic entanglement entropy based on a lightsheet construction. Although mani festly covariant the computation of the surface YAstill involves rst constructing all possible lightsheet s in the bulk L subject to the appropriate boundary condition and then mini mizing the area of the spacelike codimension two slice YLLover all the possibilities. We now argue that this procedure can be vastly streamlined to produce a simple set o f partial dierential equations for the surface. Furthermore in .we will show that the resulting prescription follows naturally from a bulkboundary relation a la. GKPW in the AdSCFT context. The covariant construction of .starts from the two boundary lightsheets L tfu ture and L tpast which are uniquely dened given a subsystem Atin the dual CFT onMat time t. We then pick a codimension two spacelike surface YAtinMwhose boundaries coincide with Atas in Fig. . There are many such surfaces but we are only interested in the ones which we can sandwich between the two l ightsheets Lfuture and Lpast in the bulk spacetime. The existence of such lightsh eets leads to the constraints for the expansions . where refers to the expansion along the null congruence generatin gLand similarly forL. The expansions are equal to dened in .up to a sign. Along a single ane parameter along the congruence. We can choose to normal ize the null vectors by scaling NN are functions on S whilst keeping them tangent to the null geodesics. In prac tice we usually omit the scaling since we are typically interested only in the si gn of the expansions and these scale simply as . However if the rescaling is singular i.e. or such simplication is not possible. This occurs the case where Scoincides with an apparent horizon as will be discussed in .. lightsheet say Lwith small deformations of the surface YAintoYandY sketched in Fig. always yield the inequality Area YAreaYAAreaY. Among innitely many choices of such surfaces YA we single out the one whose area becomes the minimum. Of course there is no minimal surface if we search a ll surfaces with the same boundary condition due to the Lorentzian signature. The add itional condition . of the nonpositive expansions along both lightsheets is crucia l for the existence of this minimum. Now pick a generic surface YAtwhich is not necessarily the minimal one such that the null expansions are negative everywhere on YAt. We expect that such a surface reaches in further than the minimal surface as can be checked by examin ing explicit examples in . As is clear from the formula . if we slightly deform the surface towards the boundary its area decreases because . We will be able to continue this deformation until both of the expansions become zero. The surface obtained in this w ay has the area which is minimum among those surfaces which allow the lightsheet co nstruction. The validity of the assumed structure of expansions which allows such a deforma tion can be conrmed in an explicit example of AdS as shown in the Fig. in... The above procedure constructs the surface whose null expan sions are both vanishing. As we have seen in . this means that this surface obtained from the minimizatio n procedure . is equivalent to the extremal surface dened by the station ary point of the area functional. Clearly this argument of equivalence i s rather speculative we leave a rigorous proof as an interesting problem for the future. To s ummarize we have obtained the following proposal Covariant holographic entanglement entropy proposal II We claim that the holo graphic entanglement entropy for a region Ais given by SAAreaYext Gd N . where Yextis a codimension two surface in Mwhich has zero null geodesic expansions i.e. bothvanish on Yext and which satises YextA. If this surface is not unique we choose the one whose area is minimum among all such surfaces h omotopically equivalent to A. Also by virtue of . and the discussion of Appendix B we have YextW. So we can just as well replace Area Yext in . by Area W without loss of generality. Henceforth we will drop the subscript ext on Yextand simply denote the surface with vanishing null expansions by Y. Relations between covariant constructions In the previous section we have motivated a covariant prescr iption for calculating the holo graphic entanglement entropy using lightsheets in analo gy with the covariant entropy bounds. This construction involves nding a surface Yextwith vanishing null expansions which as we discuss is equivalent to the extremal surface W. We have also hitherto intro duced another natural covariant surface a minimal surface on a maximal slice X. In this section after we show that the covariant proposal . can indeed be also derived from the basic principle of AdSCFT we will proceed to discuss the detailed relations between WYext andX. . Equivalence of WandYvia variational principles In the timedependent setup discussed in . we can directly apply the Lorentzian GKPW relation see e.g. as long as the UV limit of the theory becomes conformal. Ass uming that the boundary eld theory is in a pure state we have the pa thintegral expressions for the reduced density matrix analogous to the situation in . Atintegraltext D eiSsugraabacketlettabacketihtabacketlettabacketihtintegraltext D eiSsugra . The boundary conditions which will be implemented on a suit able cuto surface are the ones induced from the indices of the density matrix At. This is a Lorentzian generalization of the argument in where the proposal of was rst proven. The CFT partition function Znin . is now holographically equivalent to the partition function Zsugra nof the supergravity on the dual manifold Mnwhich is obtained by solving Einstein equations while requiring that it approaches Mnat the boundary. Since the original manifold Mnincludes the singular surface Awith a negative decit angle n its holographical extension Mnhas the codimension two decit angle surface W. If we employ the tree level supergravity approximation the acti on can be estimatedby i Gd Nintegraldisplay MngR n Gd Nintegraldisplay Wg irrelevant terms . where the irrelevant terms signify those which cancel betwe en the two terms in .. In this way after taking the derivative with respect to nas in . we obtain the holographic formula SAAreaW Gd N. . Moreover the action principle in the gravity theory instru cts us to single out the extremal surface Wamong innitely many choices of codimension two surfaces thata priori could The curvature is delta function localized along the decit a ngle surface. In actual computation we estimate this contribution by analytically continuing to t he Euclidean signature. This explains the imaginary factor iin .. be the extension into the bulk of the region Asatisfying the required boundary conditions. This completes the derivation of the holographic formula . of the entanglement entropy in timedependent backgrounds. Since a dierential geomet rical analysis shows WYext see Appendix B the above derivation may be viewed as a heuristic proof of o ur covariant proposal. . Equivalence of XandYon totally geodesic surfaces In motivating the existence of a covariant formulation of ho lographic entanglement entropy we argued that one could in principle choose a preferred slic ing of the bulk corresponding to the maximal area slices and then use the holographic entangl ement entropy proposal of . We will argue that while the maximal surfaces Xdont generically coincide with WorY there is a special case wherein this proposal for Xis equivalent to the covariant entanglement entropy proposal for Yformulated in terms of the lightsheets and the expansion al ong null geodesic congruences. The specic restriction on the maxim al slices which turns out to be relevant is the notion of totally geodesic submanifold. To examine this issue it is useful to recall a few geometric f acts related to foliation of spacetimes and extrinsic curvatures. For a codimension on e spacelike submanifold in M anchored at some time tinM with being the unit timelike normal to we dene the induced metric on g . and extrinsic curvature K . . Here and in the following will denote the covariant derivative with respect to the ful l bulk metric g. Now we can look for a minimal surface Sin . For such a putative minimal surface S letsdenote the unit spacelike normal to Slying within so that s everywhere. Then we can again dene the induced metric on the surface S hss . and the extrinsic curvature of Sin h h Ds . where Dis the covariant derivative with respect to the metric on which is related to the spacetime covariant derivative by projection from M Ds s. . This implies that h h s. . We now turn to the question of interest assuming that Sis a minimal surface on the particular slice corresponding to the maximal slice of M under what conditions does the null geodesic expansion along Nsvanish Since we assume that is a maximal slice we necessarily have K i.e. the trace of the extrinsic curvature vanishes everywhere on which i mplies that . . Similarly the constraint that Sis a minimal surface in implies that which leads to the identity ss. . Having extracted the two relations implied by being the max imal slice in MandSbeing the minimal surface in we now turn to evaluate the null expa nsions . Using . with N s we obtain K ssss . where the second equality used K and s . So will vanish provided we have ss which is equivalent to the condition Kss . Thus we see that for the null geodesic congruence to have vani shing expansion it does not suce for the surface to be a maximal slice. We must in add ition require that Kss . This is satised onlywhen K since the vector scan be taken to be arbitrary. Such a surface is called a totally geodesic subma nifold and it describes a surface whose geodesics are also geodesics of the entire spacetime. One can quickly intuit this by noting that if swere tangent to a geodesic then sss which by virtue of s will imply the vanishing of . This leads to the following claim Claim Assume that a maximal spacelike surface tanchored at a constant time ton M is totally geodesic. Then the minimal surface Xon tis equivalent to the surface Yextin the covariant entanglement entropy prescription of .. However if we require t to be totally geodesic for all ti.e.if the spacetime Mallows a totally geodesic foliation then the spacetime must be static. This is because the condit ionK means that the hypersurface orthogonal timelike vector is in fact a Killing vector. In this case the covariant construction reduces to the minimal surface pres cription .. Hence we see that the covariant entanglement entropy candid ateXreproduces the cor rect prescription WYfor all time only in the trivial case of static bulk geometrie s. However if we relax the requirement of full foliation of Mby totally geodesic slices but Note that while Kss only picks out the symmetric part of K the antisymmetric part is automatically guaranteed to vanish whenever is hypersurface orthogonal i.e. which is the present case. rather achieve K on a single slice say at t then we still haveXtYt. For example in a spacetime with time reversal symmetry t t at time t we can compute the entanglement entropy by using the minimal surface Xtin tin this case the t slice. Consistency checks for timeindependent backgrounds Thus far we have kept our discussion at a reasonably abstract level we have formulated a clear algorithm for constructing the bulk surface whose ar ea captures the entanglement entropy associated with the boundary region Ain question. A simple consistency check of our picture is that the covariant proposal should reduce to t he holographic entanglement entropy proposal of whenever the bulk spacetime is static. To make contact with that discussion we examine several examples of asymptotic ally AdS static spacetimes. This also allows us to see explicitly the equivalence between the lightsheet construction Yand the extremal surface proposal W thereby making explicit the arguments of .and.. Finally we will turn to an example of a stationary spacetime rotating BTZ geometry to illustrate the shortcomings of the minimal surface on a maxi mal slice prescription Xof.. . AdS First consider the AdS geometry described by the Poincar e metric dsdtdxdz z. . We begin by studying the null expansions for a codimension t wo surface by choosing a particular ansatz and compute the covariant holographic en tanglement entropy. .. Expansions of null geodesics A general codimension two curve Sin . is described by the constraint functions tGz xFz. . The normalized null vectors orthogonal to Sare then given by the following linear combina tions NNg . In this case we can easily prove the strong subadditivity of h olographic entanglement entropy as in since two minimal surfaces on the same time slice can inters ect with each other if they do so at the boundary of AdS. where we dened GF Fradicalbig FG F Nradicalbig F zradicalbig FG. . As explained earlier we will ignore the overall normalizat ionNof the null vectors in most parts of this paper as we are only interested in their signs.Moreover the induced metric onSis given by h FG GGFG GFFF GF . To compute the expansions . from S we need to calculate the covariant derivative of the null vectors . projected via .. This yields the expression Hradicalbig FGGG FzFFzFGzG radicalbig F FG . where we dened HFGFFz F. . .. Extremal surface and holographic entanglement entro py While we have written the expression for expansions for a gen eral curve Sin AdS parame terized as . by virtue of time translation invariance we expect that t he desired extremal surface curve lies on a constant tslice. Let us therefore concentrate on a curve Sin . with no temporal variation by requiring Gz . Then the expansions for Sare simplied to z Fz Fz Fz Fz . . If we rescale N N andN N the normalization conditions N N and N N are unchanged. The geodesic expansion scales like the null vectors i.e. and. Because we are interested in the condition this nonzero scale factor is inconsequential except so me singular cases where apparent horizons exist. One can check that the threemetric . is degenerate as required. For purposes of computing the expansions it is more useful to work with this degenerate th reemetric rather than the onemetric on the curve to ensure the correct projections of N. Notice that the expansion in the time direction is vanishing i.e. because the spacetime is static. To nd the covariant holographic entanglement entropy cand idateYto utilize our pro posal . we require that both null expansions vanish. This leads to the equation z FzFzFz . which determines the requisite surface. We can easily nd th e following simple solutions Fz hz . where his an arbitrary nonnegative constant. This means that the h alf circle xzh z is the curve YAresponsible for the entanglement entropy when we choose the subsystem Ato be an interval with length h. As can be easily veried this curve also describes a spaceli ke geodesic in AdS and likewise corresponds to the minimal surface on the constant tslice. This makes explicit the assertion made earlier that minimal surfaces on a constant t ime slice in a static spacetimes have vanishing null expansions. Hence we have veried for t he AdS example that WA XAYAfor any region A and given an explicit equation for this surface. To compute the holographic dual of the entanglement entropy SAitself we need to calculate the proper length along this bulk surface. The length LofYAis found to be L hintegraldisplayh dz z hz logh . where is the lattice spacing corresponding to the UV cuto. Using the relation between the central charge of the dual CFT and the bulk Newtons const antc G N we obtain the expression in the dual CFT language SAL G Nc logh . . This reproduces the wellknown formula in D conformal eld theory . .. Structure of the sign of expansions The signs of expansions of null geodesics are directly relat ed to the change of the area of a given spacelike surface under an innitesimal deformation as the formula . shows. In this subsection we discuss how the signs of the expansions c hange in explicit examples. We start with the dimensional at spacetime Rdsdtdxdz. If we consider the curve t constant and xFz the null vectors N are given by the formula . with the modication that Nof . now becomes N F FG. The expansions are found to be Fz Fz. . In the particular case of the circle xzh we nd h when x. When xis negative we obtain the opposite result. From the formula . and the normalization NN we nd that measure the increase of area under the innitesimal deforma tionsX N . The signs and for the circle can be intuited directly as the null vector NNis ingoing along the future lightcone and NNis ingoing along the past lightcone. We thus see that the past and future lightcones emanating from the circle are examples of lightsheets as we have explained in . see Fig. . Note also that means that the expansion in the spacelike direction is posit ive which illustrates the basic fact that the length of the circle increases as the radius hbecomes larger. Now we move on to the more interesting case . of AdS . The null expansions for static curves are already computed in .. On the curve dened by the ellipse xbzhfor a positive constant b we nd that when x for x the result has the signs reversed bbz hbbz. . Thus the expansions of ingoing null geodesics andare negative when b i.e. when the curve goes deep into the IR region while it becomes positive when b . Furthermore the expansions in AdS are vanishing when the curve is a halfcircle which coincides with the minimal surface. Thus we conclude that th e null geodesic congruences on this ellipse can be used as lightsheets only when b. In the AdS background we can notice one more interesting fact for any c urve on the lightcone one of the two null expansions is vanishing as w ill also be shown in ... For example if we consider an arbitrary curve on the future ligh tcone t xz it turns out that when x while when x . This property can be easily generalized to higher dimensional AdS spaces. The behavior of expansions inAdS is summarized in Fig. . In this way we observed that in asymptotically AdS spaceti mes the expansions of null geodesics can change their sign at the specic points in the b ulk. This property clearly plays a crucial role in our holographic computation of entangleme nt entropy. . Higher dimensional examples AdS d We can repeat the above computations of null expansions for A dSd.. In these higher dimensional examples there are many dierent choices for t he shape of region A. Working t z Extremal Surface Y Y Ymin A Fig. The signs of expansions for the ingoing null geodesics in AdS . We projected the AdS to the plane x assuming a particular series of curves whose null expansion s each take the same sign at any points. The shaded region denotes the region where two lightsheets exist. in Poincar e coordinates we can choose an arbitrary region o n the boundary Rdand in principle gure out the associated extremal surfaces. For s implicity we will concentrate on specic two examples where we assume the subsystem Ain the dual CFT is given by i an innite strip and ii a spherical ball in Rd. .. Innite strip in AdS d On the boundary of AdS din Poincar e coordinates we choose the region Ato be an innite strip dened as Atvector xt x h x i arbitrary for i . . . d . . Here we have singled out one of the spatial coordinates in Rdcalled xto take values in nite range. To nd the associated extremal surface in the bu lk we choose an ansatz for codimension two surface in AdS dby the two constraints . with a trivial relabeling xx. We require that when restricted to the boundary z the extremal surface is reduced to the boundary Aof innite strip. The null expansions of this surface can be shown to be here dd Hradicalbig FGdGGddFz FFzFGz G radicalbig F FG . where we dene Hd FGdFdFz F. . Again by virtue of the staticity of the background it suces t o consider only Fzeatioslash while Gz . It is easy to see that the vanishing of both the null expan sions for the surface localized on a constant tslice leads to the known minimal surface Fz zd radicalig zd zd . where zis the maximal zvalue reached by the surface given in terms of the width of th e region Aby the relation z d d dh . . We can obtain the entanglement entropy from the area of this s urface. For details we refer the reader to . .. dimensional ball in AdS Our previous examples have focussed on planar symmetry and w e now turn to an example where the region Aof interest is a ball in RdRdwith radius h. The region Ais given as for simplicity we choose t Abraceleftbig tvector xt hbracerightbig . where is the radial coordinate of the Poincar e metric in the polar coordinates dsdtdzdd z. . An ansatz for surfaces which respect the spherical symmetry is given by tGz Fz. . Further imposing the staticity inherited from the backgrou nd leads to the simplication Gz . For the particular case of AdS the null vectors normalized according to our usual convention are then given by N z parenleftbigg tF Fz Fparenrightbigg . . One can check that the induced metric on the surface is given b y h F FF F F F F sin . . Plugging these expressions into the formula for the null con gruence expansions we nd z FzFzFzFz z FzFz Fz z FzFz z Fzzz Fzz Fzz Fz. . One can check these null expansions vanish for the minimal su rface Fz hz. . The entanglement entropy associated with the region Aof . can be calculated from the area of this surface. As expected the surface . coincides with the minimal surface of . We refer the interested reader to for a detailed discussion of the area and comparisons of the holographic entanglement entropy thus obtained to the eld theory calculations at weak coupling. .. Area and expansion of surfaces on the lightcone In.we presented the relation between the change in the area of a s pacelike surface under a small deformation and the expansions of the null geod esics. Here we would like to understand this relation geometrically in the specic exam ple of AdS d. Consider the setup of the innite strip region on the bounda ry as in ..and take a surface which innitely extends in the directions x x xd. Such surfaces can be One can evaluate the expansions for nonzero Gz just as easily and check that the surface given in . does indeed have vanishing expansions. described by the ansatz . with xx. We would like to concentrate on the case where the surfaces lie on the lightconetx z. These can be parameterized as xps coss z ps sins t s hps . with the boundary condition p p h. The area of any of these surfaces given by a particular choice ofps is expressed as AreaY integraldisplay ds sindspsd. . where the boundary condition on the cuto surface zis being implemented through the boundary condition zs . When d the expression . does not depend on the function ps which represents the choice of the curve. This means that the deformation of an y curve on a lightcone in AdS does not change its area as long as we neglect the UV cuto. This nicely agrees with the fact that the expansion along the lightsheet is van ishing for any curve on it as mentioned in ... If we consider the opposite lightcone thradicalbig x z we can nd that on the half circle dened by x zht and z the null expansions are both vanishing i.e.this is an extremal surface as we noticed in .. On the other hand in higher dimensions d the area becomes dependent on ps. Furthermore we can see the inequality Area YAreaYAAreaY where the surfaces are labeled in accord with the conventions of Fig. . This in particular shows that the ingoing expansion along this lightcone tradicalbig x zis positive. Thus we can conclude that we cannot regard the lightcone . as a lightsheet in d . This fact can also be conrmed by direct evaluation of the expansions using .. . BTZ black hole nonrotating Our next example will be one which is not globally static but one which has a horizon and a static patch extending out to the boundary. Consider the BT Z black hole with a mass proportional to m in the Poincar e coordinates dsrmdtdr rmrdx. . We will pick the region Aon the boundary Rwith coordinates t x to be at a constant tslice and a nite interval in xwithx h. One can again take as an ansatz for the extremal surface . and compute the expansions to derive the dierential equat ions for The lightcone in question is the at space lightcone by vir tue of the Poincar e metric . being conformally at. the functions Gz and Fz. It is however simpler to exploit the fact that the extremal surfaces in AdS are spacelike geodesics on a constant tslice and nd the relevant surface directly. Therefore we would like to nd the spacelike geodesics of the formt constant and rrx in order to calculate the entanglement entropy. The conser vation equation resulting from the the fact that xis a Killing eld leads to a constant Hamiltonian dr dxrradicaligg rmparenleftbiggr r parenrightbigg . . where ris determined by the fact x h hintegraldisplay rdr rradicalbig rmrrmlogrm rm. . For future use we also record the exact relation between xandr x mlogparenleftigg rradicalbig mrmrr mr rr mr rrmparenrightigg mlogparenleftbiggrm rmparenrightbigg r r . The spacelike geodesics in BTZ for compact xare plotted on constant tslices in Fig. for various values of m. Finally the length Lof the geodesics in the BTZ spacetime is given as L integraldisplayr rr dr rradicalbig rm rr log rlogr m log r logsinhmh m. . where we introduced the UV cuto at rr. This is related to the lattice spacing dened in . viar . For large mwe nd that the regularized length of the geodesic is given by LregL log rm h . which can be interpreted as the length of a part of the horizon . Using the relation between the mass and the inverse temperat urem we nally obtain the entanglement entropy computed holograph ically from the BTZ black hole SAL G Nc logparenleftbigg sinh h parenrightbigg . where cis again the central charge of the dual D CFT. The result . agrees perfectly with the known result in the D CFT at nite temperature . When mis very small we nd Lregml logl . . . Fig. Minimal surface in BTZ in this d case a geodesic plotted o nrxslice of the bulk the radial coordinate ris compactied using tanfunction the thick outer circle represents the global AdS boundary and the thick red inner circle the hor izon radiusm .. as labeled. . Star in AdS Our nal example of a static spacetime is the dimensional A dS radiation star background considered in dsfrdthrdrrd . where the function hr is given in terms of the mass Mr of the star within radius rby hr bracketleftigg r G N Mr rbracketrightigg . and the mass density r dened by Tttrfr is related to the mass function by Mrintegraltextr r rdr. For further details see . We consider the entanglement entropy dened by dividing the Sinto two hemispheres AandB. The minimal surface for SAis clearly given by the largest twosphere Atimes the radial direction r. Thus its area is given by Area integraldisplay dr rradicalbig hr. . We are interested in the dierence SAbetween the entanglement entropy for the region A in the star geometry .. and in pure AdS . This dierence will capture the excess entanglement by virtue of the state of the boundary theory be ing an excited state of the CFT and in a sense provide a measure of how many degrees of fre edom are excited and entangled in the region in question. One can check that SAis nite and positive the These considerations can be generalized of course to any sta tic spherically symmetric asymptotically AdS spacetime. nite increase of the entanglement entropy clearly represe nts the degrees of freedom of the matter which composes the star. When Mr is very small we approximate the increase in entanglement e ntropy measured with respect to pure AdS or the CFT vacuum by SAArea G N integraldisplay drMr r . . . Stationary spacetimes the rotating BTZ geometry Our nal example of a spacetime with a timelike Killing eld outside ergoregions will be a rotating black hole spacetime. We will use this example t o illustrate the inadequacy of the minmax proposal of . providing a more robust conrmation of our lightsheet construction discussed in .. .. The holographic computation of entanglement entropy We consider dimensional KerrAdS solution i.e. rotating BTZ black hole and compute the holographic entanglement entropy for a nite interval o n the boundary. In this example as we will see one can no longer assume any constant time slice on which the extremal curve lives. The metric is given by dsrr rr rdtr rr rr drrparenleftig dxrr rdtparenrightig . where the coordinate xis compactied as xxland we assume rr. The mass M and angular momentum Jof this black hole becomes GMr r J rr G. . If we set r then the angular momentum becomes zero and the black hole . becomes identical the static example . discussed in .by setting mr . This rotating black hole background . is dual to a dimensional CFT on a circle at nite temperature with a potential for the momentum. The radius of the circle i s dened to be land we assume that the system is at a very high temperature l. The potential is conjugate to the angular momentum of the rotat ing black hole. The temperature and the potential in the dual CFT are found fr om the relations l rr. . The dual CFT is then described by the density matrix e HP . where HandPare the Hamiltonian and the momentum of the CFT. Equivalentl y we can regard as the inverse temperatures for the left and rightmoving modes. To obtain the geodesics explicitly it is convenient to reme mber that all BTZ black holes are locally equivalent to the pure AdS . Explicitly this map is given by cf. wradicaligg rr rr extXT zradicaligg r r rr ex rt r. . This maps the metric . to the Poincar e metric dsdwdwdz z. . We know that the spacelike geodesics in pure AdS . are given by the half circles of the form XXzhon a constant Tslice and their boosts ww. Indeed by mapping these geodesics in pure AdS into the rotating black hole we can obtain the relevant extremal surface. Note that despite the spacetime being jus t stationary the extremal surface WYextis indeed given by spacelike geodesics. Thus we can assume that a series of spacelike geodesics in AdS are all situated on some spacelike hypersurface ww const. . Since we are considering the subsystem Awhich is an interval at a xed time t the value oftshould be the same at the two endpoints of the geodesic. If we d ene the value of xat the endpoints by xandx this requirement leads to the constraint extextextext. . The geodesic length in AdS . leads to the holographic entanglement entropy SA c logx when the length of the interval Aon the boundary is xas we have seen in .. The UV cuto zis mapped to the cuto in the background . via radicalbig r r rerxrt . where denote the cuto at each of the two endpoints in .. Further the UV cuto rin . can be identied with the cuto i.e. the lattice spacing in the dual CFT viar . The length of the interval xis easily found to be x wwparenleftbig extextparenrightbigparenleftbig extextparenrightbig . . Putting these together we obtain the holographic entanglem ent entropy in the rotating BTZ geometry to be SAc logx c logbracketleftbigg sinhparenleftbiggl parenrightbigg sinhparenleftbiggl parenrightbiggbracketrightbigg . where l xx is the length of the interval in the dual CFT. The nal answer is manifestly timeindependent as required. Further if we se t then the above result reduces to the nonrotating BTZ answer .. .. CFT and leftright asymmetric ensembles We would like to compare the holographic result . with the entanglement entropy cal culated directly from two dimensional CFT in the ensemble .. This can be done by exploiting the fact that the value Tr n A for the reduced density matrix Afor the subsys temAis equal to the two point function of twist operators whose co nformal dimension is nc n n as shown in . For a CFT dened on a dimensional noncompact plane Euclid ean and a region A whose boundaries are at uandu one can show that Tr n A parenleftbigguu parenrightbiggc n n . where is the UV cuto in the CFT. This leads to the wellknown formu la of the entangle ment entropy at zero temperature SA nlog Tr n Avextendsinglevextendsinglevextendsinglevextendsingle nc loguu . . To derive the result at nite and described by . we need to periodically identify the Euclidean two dimensional manifold on which the CFT is dened. The total partition function of this system is given by Z Trparenleftbig e HiEPparenrightbig . where we dened Ei. For the Euclidean CFT we will take Eto be real as is conventional. This is achieved by the following conformal m ap wiE logw . . Notice that the new coordinate wsatises the periodicity wwi iE in agreement with .. Performing the conformal transformation we nd Trn A bracketleftbigg E sinhparenleftbiggl iEparenrightbigg sinhparenleftbiggl iEparenrightbiggbracketrightbiggc n n . where we have set liE logu u which is the length of the interval Ain the w coordinate. After dierentiating with respect to nas in . and remembering the relation Ei this precisely agrees with .. It is also intriguing to notice that the expression factorizes into the left and right moving contributions SASL ASR A suggesting a leftright decoupling in the two dimensional CFT. .. Comments on the minmax construction The prime reason for focusing on the rotating BTZ geometry is that it claries some of the arguments regarding the minmax proposal and the associ ated surface X. While we motivated the existence of a covariant construction using X a minimal surface on a maximal slice in . we subsequently argued that this prescription doesnt agr ee with the light sheet construction of .. In fact we claimed in .that the surfaces XandWYExt generically agree only when the spacetime admits a totally g eodesic foliation. The rotating BTZ black hole has a Killing eld twhich is timelike outside the ergo regions but is not hypersurface orthogonal.As a result while it is true that surfaces of constant tare maximal i.e. have K they do not contain the extremal surface W. This is also clear from the fact that constant tsurfaces are not everywhere spacelike. From our explicit construction of the geodesic . and . it is apparent that the geodesic moves in tdespite being pinned on the boundary at ttat both ends of the interval A. By an explicit CFT computation we have conrmed that the cova riant holographic en tanglement entropy obtained from the surface Wis indeed the correct one. While a priori it was plausible that the surface Xprovided the covariant generalization of the holographic entanglement entropy prescription this example makes it m anifest that lightsheets or ex tremal surfaces are crucial to capture the correct measure o f entanglement. This example should therefore be viewed as a strong support for our covari ant proposal. Entanglement entropy and timedependence One of the motivations behind covariantizing the holograph ic entanglement entropy pro posal was to be able to address the question of entanglement e ntropy in genuine time A necessary and sucient condition for a vector eld to be hypersurface orthogonal is . It is easy to check that tdoesnt satisfy this condition in the metric .. dependent states. We will now turn to applying our proposal t o geometries with explicit timedependence. By virtue of the AdSCFT duality these spa cetimes will correspond to states in the CFT with nontrivial time evolution. However we do not always have an ex plicit CFT description of the state in question. While this h inders direct comparison of the results on time variation of the entanglement entropy from t he geometric perspective with eld theory it nevertheless provides an interesting quali tative picture which could be made quantitative once the dictionary between states in the eld theory and geometry becomes more explicit. . VaidyaAdS spacetimes One of the most important examples in timedependent gravit ational backgrounds will be the black hole formation process via a collapse of some massi ve object. As a simplest such example we would like to study the Vaidya background which d escribes the timedependent process of a collapse of an idealized radiating star cf. . The metric of d dimensional VaidyaAdS spacetime is given in Poincar e coordinates as dsparenleftbigg rmv rdparenrightbigg dv dv drrdsummationdisplay idx i . and in global coordinate by dsparenleftbigg r mv rdparenrightbigg dv dv drrd d. . If we assume that the function mv does not depend on the lightcone time v then the background is exactly the same as the SchwarzschildAdS black hole solution after a coordinate transformation. In this sense the Vaidya metric is a simple example of black hole with a timedependent mass or temperature. The property of null geodesics in AdS Vaidya background has b een studied in from the view point of AdSCFT correspondence. The authors were i nterested in using the geodesics to compute singularities of boundary correlatio n functions. It was argued that the geodesic structure which clearly probes the spacetime geometry can be read o from the correlation function and thus a map was provided between geometric information in the spacetime and the natural observables of the eld theory. In particular it was shown how the eld theory correlation functions could be used to ascer tain the formation of a horizon in the bulk spacetime. Given that null geodesics can be used to decipher the map betw een eld theory ob servables and geometry a natural question is whether there is some more information to be gained from studying other geometric structures spacel ike geodesics or surfaces. We expect this to be generally the case because in certain case s such as in spacetimes with null circular orbits spacelike geodesics probe more easil y further into the bulk than null geodesics. Furthermore null geodesics are manifestly ins ensitive to conformal rescaling of the spacetime which is not the case for the spacelike ones. M otivated by these ideas we wish to ask whether the entanglement entropy of the boundary theo ry can be used as a nonlocal probe of the bulk geometry. Hence in the following we wish to calculate a timedependent entanglement entropy in the VaidyaAdS background. We will specically focus on the dimensional VaidyaAdS metric dsfr vdv dv drrdx fr vrmv . for simplicity. The coordinate xcan be either noncompact Poincar e coordinate or compac t global coordinate. When mv is a constant m this background is same as the BTZ black hole . which can be conrmed using the coordinate transformatio n vt mlogparenleftbiggrm rmparenrightbigg t rm r . where we have also recorded the large rexpansion for future use. In the metric . the only nonzero component of the energymomentum tensor de ned by the Einsteins equation TR R g g is Tvv rdmv dv. . By imposing the null energy condition i.e.TNN for any null vector N we nd that the timedependent mass mv always increases as the time vevolves dmv dv. . Below we would like to see how the entanglement entropy compu ted holographically changes under this timeevolution. . Extremal surface in VaidyaAdS In order to compute the holographic entanglement entropy w e need to nd the minimal surface and then compute its area. The advantage of our examp le of the dimensional VaidyaAdS spacetime is that the minimal surface is the same as the spacelike geodesic. We can express the general geodesic by using the nonane par ameterization rrx vvx . . We dene the subsystem Avat time vby the region hxhso that it always has the width h. In the dual gravity side this leads to the following bounda ry condition along the geodesic rh rh r v h vh v . where r is the UV cuto which is inversely related to the lattice spa cingi.e. r . Note that we can require rx rx and vx vx due to the reection symmetry of the background. We would like to calculate the length Lof this geodesic Lintegraldisplayh hdxradicalbig r rvfr vv . where the derivative with respect to xis denoted by the prime. This length functional being independent of x we have a conserved quantity r rr rvfr vv . where ris a constant. In addition we get two equations of motion for randvfrom the action principle. As usual only one of them is independent o f the previous conservation equation .. It is given by rrvr v vr . . Thus we have to solve these ODEs . and . in order to nd the geodesics. For a generic mv it is unfortunately not easy to nd an analytical solution . To obtain an ex plicit example we performed a numerical analysis in the spe cic case smoothly interpolating between pure AdS and BTZ fr v rm tanhv vsm . . Roughly speaking this corresponds to a null shell of charac teristic thickness vscollapsing to form a BTZ black hole of mass mat time v . We can numerically integrate to nd the spacelike geodesics in this geometry. For deniteness for the result shown below we chose vs and m . Note that in dimensions unlike in the higher dimensio nal analogs the horizon starts at nite v in this case v . Fig. shows several plots snapshots for dierent times vrminvas labeled of a series of extremal surfaces.As the horizon grows with increasing v the plots look similar to dierent size static BTZ black hol es. . Null expansions in VaidyaAdS Having seen the behaviour of the spacelike geodesics which g ive us the requisite minimal surface we next study the null expansions for the curve den ed by . in the three di mensional VaidyaAdS background .. Consider a generic curve parameterized as in . The surfaces will now vary in time as well here we show just th erxbehaviour. In fact it is easy to conrm that the extremal surface Wcannot coincide with the minimal surface on a maximal slice X. This follows simply from the fact that the geodesics anchored at c onstant von the boundary do not all lie on a single spacelike surface in the bulk VaidyaAdS spacetime. vEqual. vEqual. vEqualvEqual Minus vEqual Minus vEqual Fig. Minimal surface in VaidyaAdS in this d case a geodesic p rojected onto rxslice of the bulk xis compact the radial coordinate ris compactied using tanfunction the thick outer circle represents the global AdS boundary and the thi ck red inner circle the horizon radius at the value of vvreached by the geodesic at minimum radius as labeled. which is not necessarily a geodesic. Its two orthogonal null vectors are given by N Nparenleftbigg v fr v r rvr xparenrightbigg . where we have dened N radicaligg rfr v r r rvvfr v rrvrradicalbig r rvvfr v rfr v r. . The expansions for these null vectors are then found to be radicalbig rfr v rr rvfr vv radicalbig rfr v rr rvfr vv . where we have dened rr rvrrf rf vrvvff r rv r r vrrf rvrvf rfrrvrvvf rf r rvrfr rr f vrfr vvf r. . After some algebra we can show that both null expansions are vanishing i the equations of motion for the geodesic . and . are satised. This justies our assertion in the previous subsection that the extremal surface in question is given by a spacelike geodesic in VaidyaAdS. . Timedependent entanglement entropy Having obtained the extremal surface Wfor the VaidyaAdS geometry we can compute the entanglement entropy of the region Ausing the area of W. In particular we would now like to return to the original question about timedependen ce of the entanglement entropy. If we assume that the timedependence of the mass function mv in . is very weak mv then we can use the adiabatic approximation. First we comp ute the entropy for the static three dimensional AdS black hole i.e.BTZ and then treat the mass as a function of time v. In the BTZ black hole background the length of the geodesic i s given by the formula .. The adiabatic approximation allows us to regard mas a timedependent function mv so that the nite part of the geodesics length denoted by Lregv becomes Lregv Lv log r logsinhradicalbig mvh mv. . When the mass is very small mv . reduces to a regularized proper length as a function of lightcone time v Lregv loghh mv. . Now let us recall the monotonicity property .. If we combine it with the expression . we can show that the entanglement entropy increases in the adiabatic approximation. Hence assuming that the matter undergoing collapse to form t he black hole satises the null energy condition it is clear from the adiabatic approximat ion that the entanglement entropy SAvLregv increases in the process of a gravitational collapse. This claim can also be checked by a direct numerical analysis as shown in Fig. for the prole .. Not only is it apparent that the proper length increases mo notonically with time but we can also see that the adiabatic formula . is actually quite accurate for vs m . Note that there is a slight oset in the vvalues between the two plots presumably this is because of the dynamics in particular th e identication of the vvalues. However if we shift the vvalue appropriately and overlay the two plots the t is almo st perfect as shown in Fig. . Below we will see that the monotonicity property can be prove n via a direct perturbative analysis and furthermore that it is related to the second law of the black hole thermody namics. vInfinity .......LVaidya v .......LBTZ Fig. leftRegularised proper length Lregas a function of the boundary v for several regions ....in the VaidyaAdS spacetime ..right the corresponding prediction in BTZ from . . vInfinity ......L Fig. Regularised proper length Lregas a function of the boundary v for the particular region in the Vaidya spacetime . red dots and the corresponding prediction in BTZ from . with a shifted vvalue black curve. . Perturbative proof of entropy increase Consider the change of the area functional when the surface i s deformed slightly. The innitesimal shift of the d dimensional spacelike surface Wis described by the deviation X. In general we nd Area integraldisplay Wddradicalbig detg integraldisplay WddXintegraldisplay Wg ggX X . where ggX X is the induced metric on the surface. in the nal expression is orthogonal to the submanifold Wand is dened such that the equation of motion for this variational problem is given by . This clearly shows that the area of extremal surface does not change under any innites imal deformation provided we keep the same boundary conditi on or the surface Wis closed. However since we are interested in changing the boundary co ndition corresponding to the timeevolution the nal term in . which comes from the boundary contribution via the partial integration plays an important role. Let us now concentrate on the specic case of the three dimens ional VaidyaAdS space time and assume that Wvis the extremal surface at the asymptotic time vas in .. The equation of motion vanishes on shell by denition so only th e boundary term contributes and it can be written as integraldisplay Wg ggX X vrparenleftbigg fr vdv drparenrightbiggvextendsinglevextendsinglevextendsinglevextendsingle rr . where the right hand side should be evaluated on the boundary with the cuto rr. The factor of two in . arises due to the two endpoints xh. To derive the above result we set rand use the fact ggrr rand the deviation Xvv. As a consequence we obtain the following expression for the ti medependence of the geodesic length for any choice of mv dLv dvrbracketleftbiggparenleftbiggdv drparenrightbigg rbracketrightbiggvextendsinglevextendsinglevextendsinglevextendsingle rr. . Here we have used that the fact that in the UV limit rr the leading behavior of the relation between randvbecomes vconstant r. This result . shows a remarkable fact that the timedependence of the entangleme nt entropy only depends on the asymptotic form of the function vvr. To evaluate . explicitly let us perform a perturbative analysis by assu ming that the timedependent mass mv is very small and by keeping only its leading perturbation. The details of this computation are described in the Appendi xC. The upshot is that the asymptotic expansion ofdv dris found using C. to be dv dr rhmv rOr. . Plugging this into . we nally nd the timedependence of the geodesic length dLv dvhmv . . This precisely agrees with the one obtained from an adiabati c argument C.. Notice that this is nonnegative when we impose the null energy conditio n .. In this way we have conrmed the monotonicity property of the entanglement entropy in the process of a gravitational collapse. It would be an inter esting problem to prove this for any general function mv. We leave this for future investigation. . Relation to the second law of black hole thermodynamics Up to now we have used holography to examine the entanglement entropy for a subsystem Avat a time vin a two dimensional theory. It is interesting to consider th e limit where the subsystem approaches the total space. In this limit it turn s out that the extremal surface Wcovers the whole apparent horizon as we will explain below. Thus the nite part of the holographic entanglement entropy is dominated by the co ntribution from the area of apparent horizon. The analogous result for static AdS black holes has been already obtained in . When Avnally coincides with the total system the end points Avannihilate with each other and the extremal surface becomes the closed s urface dened by the apparent horizon at time v where vis the limiting value of the coordinate von the extremal surface toward IR region. The future apparent horizon is dened by the boundary of a future trapped surface . In other words on the apparent horizon the expansion outof the outgoing future directed null geodesics is vanishing while the other expan sioninof the ingoing null geodesics is nonpositive see Fig. out in. . Let us nd an apparent horizon in the Vaidya metric .. Consider the particular class of codimension two surfaces dened by r constant and v constant. Then the null expansions can be read from . as follows inradicalbig rmv r outradicalbig rmv r. . rHorizon Outgoing Ingoing outinOutgoing Ingoing rrhorizon r inout Fig. The behavior of the null geodesics near an apparent horizon. One might naively think the expansions of null geodesics are both vanishing at rradicalbig mv. However this is actually not true because we have not normal ized the null vectors N. such that they satisfy the geodesic equations N N . The correct null vectors are given by N inr N out r v vfr vr v r . where r v is a positive function determined as a solution to vr v rr v r r v which is smooth at rradicalbig mv. The corresponding expansions of the null geodesic congruences then become in r outfr vr v r. . With these correct normalizations we nd that the condition . for an apparent horizon is satised at fr v . Thus we can conclude that rradicalbig mv is an apparent horizon in the dimensional VaidyaAdS metric. While in general in timedependent backgrounds the apparent horizon does not coincide with the event horizo n we are guaranteed that event horizon always lies outside the apparent horizon . In the above example the formula . did not give the correct sign of the expansions as the rescaling needed to satisfy the geodesic equation is s ingular. Since this occurs because fr v rmv vanishes on the apparent horizon for generic curves which do not reach the apparent horizon this problem does not appear and we can r ead o the correct sign of expansion from .. Let us now return to the reason for the extremal surface Wto almost wrap the apparent horizon when the subsystem is taken to be as large as the total system. Finding the extremal surface is equivalent to solving for the vanishing null expa nsion given by . the apparent horizon provides a solution to this criterion as is manifes t from .. Thus we can conclude that the limit of the subsystem engulng the entire system t he extremal surface appears to coincide with a spatial section of the apparent horizonthis fact can also be observed nicely in Fig. . Therefore we can argue that the total entropy Stott Trt logt in the dual timedependent theory is given by the area of the apparent ho rizon at tv. The time dependence of Stotmeans that the evolution of the system is nonunitary this i s the usual issue of evolution of a density matrix.It is also interesting to note that for reproducing a physical quantity the apparent horizon which is dened u sing local quantities is more crucial than the event horizon whose denition is rather gl obal. The second law of black hole thermodynamics tells us that the area of apparent horizon always increases under any physical process which satises the appropriate energy condition also cf. . This can be shown explicitly from the condition . and the basic formula . which guarantees that the area increases under an innite simal deformation Xalong the evolution of the apparent horizon XN outN in. On the other hand we can derive this second law of the apparent horizon area fro m the monotonicity property . by taking the mentioned limit of the minimal surface. In thi s way the two concepts are naturally connected with each other. Notice that on both sides the monotonicity stems from the positive energy condition. We note in passing that in the limit of the subsystem Aengulng the system the temporal evolution of the extremal surface Wis captured by the behaviour of dynamical horizons . A dynamical horizon is dened to be a smooth codimension one spacelike submani fold of the spacetime which can be foliated by a family of closed spacel ike surfaces such that the leaves of the foliation have one null expansion vanishing and the ot her null expansion being strictly negative as in .. It is tempting to infer from this that the results proved fo r the area increase of dynamical horizons can be ported to the pres ent situation and in particular used to establish a second law of entanglement entropy fro m holographic considerations. Strictly speaking as we have argued above the apparent hor izon is not a minimal surface. Moreover the full apparent horizon is a bulk codimension one surface . We will interpret the fact that the extremal surface Wdips down almost all the way to the location of the apparent ho rizon and wraps the spatial section before returning back to the boundary to signify that the are a of the apparent horizon plays an important role in computing the entanglement entropy in the limit of th e subsytem Aapproaching the full system N. One could try to interpret this as unitary evolution in a tens or product theory where the second Hilbert space is hidden behind the horizon as in the eternal AdS blac k hole . Of course in the dynamical situation we do not have exact thermal periodicity and this would imply that the shadow CFT lives on a shifted locus in the complex time plane. M C timeM Fig. The AdS wormhole geometry and the topologically nontrivia l cycle Con the boundary. Other examples of timedependent backgrounds . Wormholes in AdS and entanglement entropy Consider the entanglement entropy StotTrtotlogtotfor the total system as in .. It is vanishing if the system is in a pure state. When it is non vanishing it is usually interpreted as the thermal entropy and correspondingly its AdS dual spacetime is expected to have an event horizon. In such examples the total entropy Stotis dual to the Bekenstein Hawking entropy of the black hole in question. In Lorentzian geometries such as the eternal SchwarzschildAdS geometry we can equivalently regard th e entropy as arising from the entanglement between the total system and another identica l system hidden behind the horizon as in cf. also for other examples. A recent discussion of issues relevan t to this context can be found in . In this section we would like to point out an example which has a nonzero total entropy Stotand its origin seems to be dierent from the example mentione d above. In particular the example we have in mind is an Euclidean spacetime with no even t horizons. These are the Euclidean AdS wormholes discussed in . They are obtained by considering the hyperbolic slices of Euclidean AdS dHd dsHdd cosh ds Hd . and by taking a quotient of Hdby a discrete group to generate a compact manifold. We mainly consider the case d because in this case the background is perturbatively stable . Also the dual two dimensional CFT is welldened on a backg round of negative curvature H a Riemann surface. The two boundaries MandMare given by the two limits and . After the quotient by the Fuchsian group the two boundaries become the same Riemann surface with genus g see Fig. . Such a solution leads us to a puzzleimmediately as pointed out in . From the CFT There is another possibility that the pathintegral over in nitely many such geometries cure the problem side we expect that the two CFTs on the two boundaries are dec oupled from each other. Thus all correlation functions between them should be vanis hing. However from the gravity side there are nontrivial correlations since the two boun daries are connected through the bulk. Here we would like to point out a possible resolution to this p roblem. Our claim is that the CFT onMand the CFT onMare actually entangled with each other despite the absence of an event horizon. To check CFT and CFT are indeed entangled we need to compute the entanglement entropy Sfor the total system of CFT . This should coincide with the entanglement entropy Sfor the CFT we expect that the total system CFT CFT to be in a pure state. When we choose a Euclidean timedirection locally in the two dimensional space M the total system at a specic time in CFT is dened by a circle CinM which is topologically nontrivial. This setup can be regarded as a h igher genus generalization of the computation at a nite temperature using Euclidean BTZ blac k hole done in . Let us dene the circle Cminin the Riemann surface to be cycle with minimal length among those which are homotopic to C. Then the minimal surface which is relevant to the holographic computation of Sturns out to be the circle Cminat the throat . This can be understood as follows see Fig. below. We rst consider the entropy SAassuming thatAis a submanifold of C. Then we can easily nd the minimal surface whose end point atcoincides with A. As we gradually increase the size of A the minimal surface anchored on one boundary dips deeper into the bulk. In the lim itA C the two end points ofAannihilate and the minimal surface gets localized at the thr oat. So the maximum entropy is given by the area of the neck. It is clear from the ge ometric picture that SS since both are measured by the area of the throat. In this way we nd that the entanglement entropy Sbetween CFT and CFT is given by SSAreaC G N. . As this is clearly nonvanishing due to the throat connectin g the two boundaries we can conclude that the two CFTs are entangled with each other. Int erestingly the existence of such a minimal surface at the throat also plays the crucial ro le when we present a generic denition of wormhole as discussed in . The above denition of entanglement entropy between two CFT s only depends on the topological class of the cycle C. Thus we can dene gdierent entropies when MM is a genus gRiemann surface. We would also like to stress that the genus o ne version of the above calculation is equivalent to the ordinary Euclidean c omputation of the Bekenstein as discussed in . Here we are assuming that each of perturbatively stable as ymptotically AdS solutions should have its dual CFT interpretation before summing over the geometries. A AMA Large A MM CM AMinimal surface Fig. The computation of entanglement entropy in the presence of t wo boundaries in the AdS wormhole geometry at xed value of the Euclidean time. Hawking entropy of black holes. In the above discussion we have concentrated on Euclidean w ormholes. In the Lorentzian case the topological censorship with assumptions about energy conditions guarantees that disconnected boundaries are separated from each other by event horizons. This is a simple consequence of null geodesic convergence following from Raychaudhuris equation essentially if two disconnected boundaries were in causal c ommunication then null geodesics which are initially contracting will have to reexpand vio lating the null convergence condi tion. If we allow the presence of some exotic matter so that th e Lorentzian wormholes exist the above computation of the entanglement entropy in wormho le geometries can be equally applied to the Lorentzian case. . Entanglement entropy of the AdS bubble Our nal example of a timedependent asymptotically AdS bac kground is the AdS bubble solution dsfrddr frrparenleftbig d cosh d parenrightbig . where fr rr r. This is obtained via a double Wick rotation of the Schwarzsc hild AdS black hole in the global coordinates. This solution repr esents a background where a bubble of nothing shrinks from innite size to a minimum valu er . and subsequently reexpands out as the time evolves from to. If we consider a double Wick rotation of the planar SchwarzschildAdS black hole in Po incar e coordinates we obtain the static AdS bubble or AdS soliton whose entanglement entr opy was computed in and a quantitative comparison with the dual YangMills has been m ade successfully. The coordinate in . is compactied and the smoothness of this solution require s the periodicity where is given by r r r parenleftbiggradicalig r parenrightbigg . . One can show that this solution is asymptotically AdS as r . The important point is that the time tin the asymptotically AdS global coordinate is dierent fro min .. They are related via tantr r sinh cosh. . The boundary of the metric . is dS S with being the deSitter time coordinate. Now we are interested in the entanglement entropy SAat xed time ttin the boundary theory on dS S . The radius of SdShas a time varying radius cosh. We dene the subsystem Asuch that its boundary AisTS S where the second Sis the equator of the S. Then the extremal surface will be given by the two dimension al surface dened by g r times the S. To explicitly determine the function g one needs to solve a complicated set of partial dierential equations. If we assumer i.e. r then the condition t constant is approximated by constant. To avoid solving the dierential equations we c onsider a minimal surface on the time slice dened by t const .as a further approximation.Under this approximation we can easily nd the entanglement entro py SAt AreaW G N G Ncoshintegraldisplay rr drintegraldisplayr dr G Nr r cosh . where ris the UV cuto. We nd that the entropy is proportional to co sh cost. This is consistent with the known area law of the entanglement entro py because Area Acosh. Note that the nite term has a minus sign. This is because the e mergence of the bubble means the disappearance of degrees of freedom as discussed i n about the static AdS bubble example. It would be interesting to understand this t imedependent entanglement entropy from the dual eld theory side and to nd the explicit extremal surface for this geometry. Recall that we are working in units where the AdS radius is set to unity. Clearly this surface does not coincide with Yin our covariant construction except t . However we believe that we can obtain a qualitative behaviour of the t imedependent entanglement entropy using this approximation. Discussion In this paper we have presented the covariant holographic f ormula . or equivalently . of the entanglement entropy or vonNeumann entropy in A dSCFT correspondence within the supergravity approximation. We propose that it i s simply given by the area of the extremal surface in a given asymptotically AdS backgrou nd. This allows us to calculate entanglement entropy of dual conformal eld theories eve n in timedependent backgrounds. This is a natural generalization of the previously proposed holographic formula for static AdS backgrounds . Our covariant holographic proposal claims that the entangl ement entropy SAfor the subsystem Ais equal to the area of a certain bulk surface S which is anchored at the boundary A in Planck units as in the BekensteinHawking formula. Our m ain conclusion is that the surface Sis given by the extremal surface W which is an extremum of the area functional. We argued that Wis equivalent to the surface Y which we motivated from the covariant entropy bound. In particular Yis dened to be the minimal area surface among the family of codimension two bulk surfaces satisfying the requisite boundary conditions with the additional constraint that they support two light sheets i.e. the null geodesic con gruences directed toward the boundary have nonpositive ex pansion. More constructively Ycorresponds to the surface with vanishing null expansions. We gave an argument which supports our claim WY a rigorous proof is left as an intriguing problem for the fut ure. We also pointed out another potential candidate for a covari antly dened surface a minimal surface on a maximal timeslice X which reduces to the minimal surface in static space times. We showed that Xcoincides with Wwhen the bulk spacetime is foliated by totally geodesic spacelike surfaces and argued that generically Xdoesnt capture the holographic entanglement entropy of a specied boundary region. We argued that our covariant proposal can be derived natural ly using the lightsheet construction and thus is closely related to the covariant en tropy bound Bousso bound . At rst sight this relation is rather surprising since the entropy bound is usually associated with the thermodynamic entropy while the entanglement entr opy has a dierent origin. It strongly supports the historical idea that the entanglemen t entropy is connected with a microscopic origin of the gravitational entropy with quant um corrections see also and references therein. We leave further exploration of t his relation as an important open problem. It would also be interesting to generalize the covariant holographic formula beyond the supergravity approximation assumed in the above discussion see for recent progress in the Euclidean case. We believe that deeper understanding of the entanglement en tropy will provide crucial insights into the nature of the holographic relation betwee n quantum gravity and its dual nongravitational lower dimensional theory. One reason fo r this stems from the universality of the denition of this quantity for any system described by the laws of quantum mechanics. We can deal equally well with diverse systems such as spin cha ins quantum Hall liquids gauge theories matrix models and even cosmological model s from this viewpoint. For each we can then examine if a holographic dual exists and then exp loit the covariant construction above to compute the entanglement entropy. The second reaso n is that the entanglement entropy is holographically described by a basic geometrica l quantity namely the area of a welldened codimension two surface as we have discusse d extensively. Given a specic bulk geometry which is described by some particular CFT sta te we can calculate the proper areas of the requisite surfaces which we have conjectured to correspond to the entanglement entropy for that state. Conversely given a specic state of the boundary theory we can ask how much infor mation is encoded in the entanglement entropy. In particula r for a system in a given state admitting a gravitational dual if we know the entanglement entropy for all subsystems A of the boundary can we decode the full geometry of the gravit ational dual corresponding to that state at least at the supergravity level Even thoug h we leave the actual metric extraction for future work we believe that most if not all of the metric information can indeed be extracted from the entanglement entropy data by a s uitable inversion technique. An analogous problem has been discussed in where the singularities in the CFT cor relators the socalled bulkcone singularities were use d to distinguish dierent geometries. The basic idea is that the bulkcone singularities occur for correlators whose operator inser tions are connected by a null geodesic through the bulk space time and since bulk geodesics are determined by the bulk geometry knowing the endpoints o f null geodesics allows us to extract a large amount of information about the bulk geometr y. Using this technique has numerically demonstrated metric extraction for a class of static spherically symmetric bulk spacetimes. However null geodesics have their limitations. They are in sensitive to conformal rescaling of the metric and they probe only the part of the bulk which al lows their endpoints to remain pinned at the boundary. Hence the metric extraction of does not probe the bulk past null circular orbits. In this respect a spacelike geodesic or m ore generally a spacelike surface would bypass both of these shortcomings. Not only are spacel ike geodesics sensitive to the conformal factor but also they probe deeper into the bulk wh ile remaining pinned at the boundary. This is demonstrated in Fig. where metric extraction would be allowed all the way down to the horizon. Moreover when the bulk is or hig her dimensional the codimension two surfaces are likewise higherdimensiona l and therefore may be expected to contain a larger amount of information than geodesics whi ch are only onedimensional quantities. The computation of the entanglement entropy in a timedepen dent background is in general a very hard question due to technical complications . However our holographic for mula allows us to solve this problem simply provided the sys tem under consideration has a holographic dual. In this paper we examined several examp les of timedependent back grounds. First we considered the dimensional AdSVaidya background which is dual to a timedependent background of a dimensional CFT. There we found that the entanglement entropy computed holographically increases under time evo lution. We have also seen that this is closely related to the second law of the black hole the rmodynamics. This result sug gests the expected monotonicity property namely that give n the null energy condition in any gravitational collapse the entanglement entropy alway s increases. It would be interesting to see if monotonicity is preserved once we take into account quantum corrections described by the Hawking radiation on the gravity side. Another example we discussed concerns wormholes in AdS. Eve n though the two dual CFTs on the two disconnected boundaries look decoupled from each other there are non vanishing correlation functions from the bulk gravity view point . We proposed a possible resolution to this puzzle by showing that the entanglement e ntropy between the two CFTs is actually nonvanishing. This conrms that they are quant um mechanically entangled. Since the concept of entanglement entropy is welldened in any timedependent system it provides a very useful physical quantity to analyze in a qu antum system which is far from the equilibrium where we cannot dene the usual thermo dynamical quantities. At the same time it is an important quantity bearing on quantum pha se transitions of various low dimensional systems at zero temperature. Therefore our res ults can be regarded as a rst step toward the analysis of condensed matter physics using t he AdSCFT correspondence seee.g. for other recent interesting approach. Acknowledgements We would like to thank O. Aharony R. Azeyanagi D. Eardley D . Garnkle M. Headrick T. Hirata G. Horowitz D. Marolf T. Nishioka S. Ross S. Sh enker T. Shiromizu E. Silver stein L. Susskind S. Yamaguchi for extremely useful discu ssions. We would like to thank the organisers of the Indian Strings Meeting for hospit ality during the initial stages of this project. VH and MR would in addition like to thank the K ITP Santa Barbara for hospitality during the course of this project. A Covariant construction of causallymotivated surface Z Above we have discussed three distinct constructions as can didate covariant duals of the entanglement entropy namely the surfaces WX and Y. All of these require solving an extremization problem. However in .we have also mentioned an alternate construction Z which may be computationally simpler to nd. This is becaus e the requisite codimension one surface on which we dene Zis constructed purely based on causal relations and therefo re does not require e.g.solving for geodesics though in practice in many examples it is quite easy to nd this by using null geodesics. The causal covariant construction Zwill be achieved by a series of steps . Starting with the spatial region AtNtM construct its domain of dependence DtM. This is the set of all boundary points qthrough which all causal boundary curves qnecessarily intersect At DtqM qMqAt eatioslash A. . Construct the bulk causal wedge Ctof the boundary region Dt. This is dened as the set of bulk points pfrom which there exists both a futuredirected and a pastdi rected causal curve pand p which intersectsDt. Ctp M p pDt eatioslashand p pDt eatioslash A. . Let Btbe the boundary in the bulk of Ct. In some simple cases this is constructed from the future and past bulk lightcones from the past and fu ture tip of Dt. Btp M M pCtCtDt A. . Finally consider the set of all spacelike surfaces lying inBtand pinned at At. From these spacelike surfaces take one with the maximal area.We denote this maximal surface by Zt. So we have ZtBt M ZtAt. In Fig. we indicate the construction of Zmore explicitly by sketching various dimensional slices of the spacetime as labeled. In Table we show the dimensionality of the various regions discussed and specify whether they li e in the bulk or in the bound ary. Recall that the Ztis a codimension two surface in M as is the boundary region At. Furthermore this construction does not depend on a choice o f coordinates but only on phys ically meaningful quantities causal relations in the spac etime and proper area of a given spacelike surface. This ensures that we can apply the same co nstruction for time dependent bulk geometries just as easily. For purposes of this denition we treat Mas a subset of M so that a bulk curve can intersect i.e. terminate on the boundary. This is motivated by using the us ual cuto surface instead of the actual boundary. More technically we want the ideal points associ ated with the TIP or TIF of the requisite curve through pto lie in Dt. There may in general be more than one such surface but we are u ltimately interested in the area of such a surface and this value is unique. The fact that the area is b ounded from above is tied to the fact that we are looking for a surface which has only one dimension less thanBt lower dimensional surfaces could achieve arbitrarily high area by crumpling. B CtCtMM xxMDt tZ tZ t tz zM MDt Dt AtAtAt t Fig. Sketch of the proposed construction of the desired bounding surface Zt. Table Dimensionality of the various regions discussed. region dimensionality bulkbdy M d M M d M At d M At d M Dt d M Ct d M Bt d M Zt d M WXY d M A. Discrepancy in AdS dford Now let us consider whether the construction Zprovides a viable candidate for the dual of the entanglement entropy. In order for the area of Zto be equal to the entanglement entropy for general states a minimal requirement is that Zreduces to the correct minimal surface for static spacetimes. Therefore we wish to check wh ether in any static spacetime Zcoincides with Wwhich as we argued above automatically coincides with XandYfor all static spacetimes. We can nd an easy counterexample even for pure AdS in more than three dimensions for nonspherical regions. For simplicity let us consider the innite strip in AdS in Poincar e coordinates. The bulk metric is ds zdtdzdxdy and let the region Aon the boundary be an innite strip extended along the ydirection t xh h. The minimal surface is given by . with xz given by d and smeared over all y. On the other hand the causal construction of Zoutlined above is determined by pastfuture directed null geodesics at constant y from z x thinto the bulk. Since these are insensitive to the conformal factor of the bulk met ric they behave just as in at spacetime the maximal area surface lying on the intersect ion of the future and past light cones from the tips of D is given simply by the halfcircle zxh uniformly smeared in theydirection. We can easily check that this surface Zdoesnotcoincide with the minimal h zStarzh Minushx WZ Fig. A constant ycrosssection of the two surfaces ZandWfor innite strip of width hin AdS. This example demonstrates that Z eatioslashWXY. surface WsinceZdoes not satisfy.. In particular Fig. demonstrates the dierence Note however that remarkably for a circular region A the two surfaces ZandWwould coincide between the two surfaces. Moreover we can easily check that the area of Zis much larger than the area of Wsince Zlies closer to the boundary where the warp factor diverges so the former cannot yield the entanglement entropy. The above discrepancy gets exacerbated in higher dimension s where as dincreases the solution to . becomes more separated from the curve Z given by zxh which is independent of d. In fact in the more physically interesting case of AdS we have an innite discrepancy between the area of Zand that of W. Here we can actually compare our results directly with a free YangMills calculation and check expl icitly which surface yields a better estimate of the entanglement entropy. In particular the en tropy density corresponding to W which coincides with the minimal surface considered in see Eq.. of that paper is given by SW G Nparenleftbigg . hparenrightbigg A. where zis the usual UV cuto. Note that we are quoting here the resul t for the entropy density and the AdS radius is set to unity. On the other hand t he entropy density associated withZcan be easily computed to be SZ G Nparenleftbigg h hlogh parenrightbigg . A. Note that apart from the standard divergence SZalso suers from a logarithmic diver gence related to the conformal anomaly so that the discre pancy in the areas of ZandW is actually innite though the leading divergence is the sa me. Now to compare these gravity results with the YangMills re sults we consider the direct free YangMills computation. This leads to the following en tropy density when we expressed it in terms of AdS quantities SY M G Nparenleftbigg const . hparenrightbigg . A. Of course we do not expect the free YangMills result to agre e quantitatively with the AdS gravity computation since the latter corresponds to the st rongly coupled gauge theory. Also we cannot directly compare the divergent term since the UV cu to in YangMills calculation is not necessarily equal to the one in the AdS side. However w e do expect that the nite part of entropy should agree with each other semiquantitat ively as evidenced by the famous entropy factor for the black Dbranes.Comparing A. with A. and A. we immediately see that the extremal surface Wyields a much better approximation of the entanglement entropy for the free YangMills system than Z. We expect this to remain true even at strong coupling. exactly. In fact its amusing to note that the ratio of the coecients of the leading nite terms in the entangle ment entropy expressions A. and A. also lies very close to . A. Dimensional static bulk geometries Above we have seen that for AdS dwithd the surface Zdoes not necessarily coincide with the requisite minimal surface for static spacetimes. T hisa priori rules it out as a candi date covariant dual of entanglement entropy in timedepend ent scenarios as well. However we may still ask whether in dimensions the Zconstruction works better. After all the dual eld theory lives in dimensions so we would expect man y special properties. Indeed from the geometrical point of view dimensional bulk is sp ecial since Ais dimensional Btis always described simply by a lightcone. Moreover perfo rming the above check for d we nd that ZW since the surface zxhsatises .. In fact slightly less trivially we can likewise check by ex plicit calculation that in global AdS with dsr dtdr rrdandAt t bothZandWare given by r cos sincoscossin. A. Similarly in BTZ with dsrr dtdr rr rdZandWlikewise coincide and are given by r r coshr sinhr coshrcoshr sinhr. A. Let us therefore ask whether this agreement holds in general . Specically consider a metric for a general static spherically symmetric dimen sional spacetime dsfrdthrdrrdA. which we take to be asymptotically AdS frrandhrrasr . Let the boundary region Abe the same as above At . We want to ask whether ZandWcoincide in this general static case. Note that Wis simply a spacelike geodesic anchored at whereas Zis the projection to t of a null geodesic congruence from the tip of D. The eective potential for geodesics with energy Eand angular momentum L dened by rVer is given by Ver hrbracketleftbigg E frL rbracketrightbigg A. where for null geodesics and for spacelike geodesics. Since Wcorresponds to the spacelike geodesic at constant t pinned at we have E which xes the relation between Land. Also the minimum radius reached rminis easy to nd from Vermin we simply have rminL. Expressing Wasr we then obtain r Lintegraldisplayr Lradicalbigg hr rL rdr . A. To construct Z we consider a null geodesic congruence labeled by LEand we choose parameterization such that E . Then tandalong the geodesic written in terms of r are given by tr integraldisplay rradicaligg hr rfrrradicalbig frdr A. r integraldisplay rradicaligg hr rfrradicalbig fr rdr . A. Now let r be the value of ralong the geodesic at which treaches zero tr . ThenZis given by r which as written is a parametric curve parameterized by but out of which should be eliminated to compare directly with A.. To make progress consider the change in as we vary ri.e. as we vary r rr r r r A. which we can nd using the generalized Leibnitz rule. We want to compare the resulting expression with the corresponding variation for the spacel ike geodesic W dr drL rradicalbigg hr rLatrr. A. We then obtain a long integral equation which we can simplif y eliminate the integral by observing that tr which follows from the denition of r we can again use the generalized Leibnitz rule to write this explicitly. Hence the assumption that ZWreduces to the much simpler equation which we wish to verifyfalsify for general fr and for all r fr L. A. While it is straightforward to check that this mysterious re lation does hold for the cases discussed above of AdS and BTZ as consistency demands it is less trivial to check it for general fr. Resorting to numerical analysis we nd that unfortunate ly A. is not satised for arbitrary fr although Zis typically wellapproximated by W. Hence we conclude that even in dimensions Z eatioslashW. To understand better why this is the case consider the parti cular point on the surfaces Z andWcorresponding to namely when rreaches its minimal value. For the spacelike geodesic W this is simply L whereas for Z it corresponds to r r. Therefore a simple way to check that Z eatioslashWis to show that in general reatioslashL. We can extract the relation between randLby writing using the spacelike geodesic A. and the null geodesic A. with integraldisplay rradicaligg hr frdrintegraldisplay Lradicaligg hr rparenleftbigr Lparenrightbigdr . A. But this relation clearly indicates that whereas for any xe dLdepends only on hr since the spacelike geodesic at constant tcannot be sensitive to frrdepends on both hr and fr so rcannot coincide with Lfor arbitrary fr. This provides a proof that Z eatioslashWfor general dimensional static spherically symmetric sp acetimes. A. Use of Zto bound the entanglement entropy Above we have described the construction Zand argued that it does not in general coincide withXY orW even in static backgrounds. Hence although Zis based only on causal relations and therefore carries a certain appeal due to its s implicity we may well ask what is it useful for. In the context of entanglement entropy we propose that comp utingZis useful if simpler than computing WY orX because it provides a bound on the entanglement entropy. In particular we expect that the area of Zis larger than or equal to the areas of WandY at least for sensible spacetimes. If the spacetime is stat ic this is clearly true by denition because the correct surface WYis the minimal area surface. In more general case one . of our covariant constructions implies this speculation though we cannot oer a general proof. Imagine the situation where we want to nd the minimal surfac eWYfor a complicated choice of the subsystem Ain order to compute the holographic entanglement entropy in a static higher dimensional spacetime. In this case it seems almost impossible to nd the minimal surface analytically because we need to solve a part ial dierential equation with a generic initial condition. However to nd null geodesics will be much more tractable. Then we can nd a denite and useful bound for the entanglemen t entropy by employing the construction of Z. B Null expansions and extremal surfaces B. Denition of extrinsic curvature Consider a ddimensional spacelike submanifold Sin aDdimensional spacetime Mwith Lorentzian signature. The coordinates of Mare denoted by xand those of the submanifold Sare. We dene the extrinsic curvature Km as follows. There are Ddvectors nm m ... D d onSwhich are orthogonal to S. The extrinsic curvature is dened by nm Km . B. In particular if we choose a coordinate system adapted to Sso that x yl where l ... D dlabels the directions normal to S then we obtain Km l nm l. B. Picking any two tangent vectors u vTS we can equivalently dene the extrinsic cur vature by Km uv uvnm . B. B. Extremal surfaces We dene an extremal surface by the saddle point of the area fu nctional AreaS integraldisplay Sddradicalbig detg B. where gis the induced metric and is written in terms of the total spac etime metric gas ggX X . After a little algebra the equation of motion can be rewritt en as g B. where is dened by X XX X. B. It is possible to show that is orthogonal to TSi.e. X . Thus the only independent components are Ddvectors nm . Let us choose the specic coordinate system such that X yl as before. Then it is easy to see nm l nm lKm . B. Thus we nd that the extremal surface condition is equivalen t to the vanishing of the trace of the extrinsic curvature gKm gnm . B. In a generic coordinate frame this is expressed as gKm . B. B. Expansions of null geodesics relation to extremal surf aces Consider a codimension two spacelike surface S. There are two independent normal vectors at each point on S. We can choose them to be lightlike and call them N andN . They are normalized such that N NN N and N N. We can dene the extrinsic curvatures K for these vectors. The two null expansions are dened by gK . B. It is clear from the above denition of the extrinsic curvatu re that when gK i.e. Sis a extremal surface both of the expansions are zero . Also from this denition we can nd that when Nis a null Killing vector i.e.N N the null expansion is obviously vanishing. C Details of perturbative analysis in VaidyaAdS backgroun d We perform a perturbative analysis by only keeping the linea r order about the mass mv in the Vaidya. We consider the extremal surface or equivalently a geodesi c in the background . assuming that mv is very small. At the boundary rr the two end points of the geodesic are given by v r x v rh. We assume the following prole rx hxsx vx v hxuxhxh. C. After we plug this into . and . we obtain the dierential equations for the perturbation sx and ux at linear order xhxsx hxxhsx xhxmvx h C. hxsx xhxsxhxux C. where we have dened the very small quantity by h r . C. Recall that h rifm . Integrating C. we obtain sx x hx bracketleftbigg h xintegraldisplayx dymvy hybracketrightbigg . C. Clearly we nd s hand this is consistent with C.. Notice also the property sx sx. To make sense of our perturbative argument we need to requ ire that sx does not include the singular term hxwhen we take the limit xh. This determines the value of as follows integraldisplayh dy mvy hy. C. The other function ux can be found by integrating C. twice by using C.. After some analysis we can show that the UV cuto rris related to the UV cuto xhofxvia parenleftig hparenrightig h r . C. The total geodesic length Lis then found to be Lintegraldisplayh hdxrx r hintegraldisplayh hdxparenleftbigg hxsx hxparenrightbigg . C. Explicit Calculations of Geodesic Length Consider the following specic approxima tion to the timedependent mass mv mv mvvv. C. This is true when the timedependence is small and is exact wh en the mass is linear function of the time v. Further we assume the mass itself is also very small. Under t hese conditions we obtain from C. integraldisplayh dxmvmv hxhx h mvh mv. C. With the specic prole C. we can integrate C. and C. analytically. After a somewhat lengthy computation we nd Lv logparenleftbiggh parenrightbigg hmv hmv. C. Substituting the relation C. into C. we obtain the nal expression Lv log hr hmv hmv. C. When mis a constant this leads to m h which is consistent with our previous analysis in the BTZ geometry. The nite part of the geodesic length after we subtract the un iversal divergent piece log h r is now given by Lreg hmv hmv. C. In the case of the linear prole or when mv is small enough we nd the geodesic length at generic time v Lregv hmv mvvv hmv mvh C. and its time derivative is given by d dvLregv hmv. C. Explicit form of sxanduxUnder the assumption C. we can nd the following explicit solutions for the functions sx and ux introduced in C. sx shx hxmv h hxx hx hxarctanparenleftig x hxparenrightig hx mv ux x hx mv bracketleftigxxh hlogh hxparenleftbigg hxarctanparenleftbiggx hxparenrightbigg hparenrightbiggbracketrightig mv. C. Asymptotic Expansion of rxandvxFrom the previous explicit expression of sx andux the asymptotic expansion of rx in the limit xhis given by rxparenleftigg hh mh mparenrightigg hx parenleftigg h h mh mparenrightigg hx h mhx Ohx . C. Notice that the coecient of hx in C. is the same asradicalbigr h h. On the other hand the asymptotic expansion of vx in the limit xhbecomes vxvhparenleftbigg loghparenrightbigg mparenleftigg h h m h mparenrightigg hx h mhx Ohx. C. Finally the asymptotic relation between rx and vx can be shown with some eort to be vx vhmv log h rhmv rOr. C. The rst two terms represent the constant contribution vvh as considered in .. 