 GroundbasedairCherenkovtelescopeshavedetectedinthel ast years a number of unidentied sources of very high energy VHEEGeVgammarayslocatedintheGalacticplane. Therst representativeof these sourcesTeV J was discovered serendipitously with the HEGRA telescope syste m in the Cygnus region Rowell Horns Aharonianet al. . In a subsequent deep exposure for a total of hours of observation time the source detection was conrmed and its properties were studied in detail HornsRowell Aharonianet al.a. A remarkable feature of TeV J is the fact that the angular extension of the source is ..stat.sys arc min in radius which corresponds to a FWHM arc min. Gammaray emission from TeV J has been con rmedindependentlybythe WhipplecollaborationLanget a l. Konopelkoetal. . A gammaray excess from the Based on observations obtained with XMMNewton an ESA sci ence mission with instruments and contributions directly f unded by ESAMember StatesandNASA.Cygnus region albeit more extended was recently reported by the Milagro collaborationAbdoet al. . The properti esof TeV J are common to most of the other unidenti ed VHE gammaray sources that have been discovered with the H.E.S.S. telescopes so far Aharonianetal. b a TeV J can be considered as the prototype of the unidentiedVHE gammaraysourcesknowntoday. So far a number of pointlike or moderately extended candi dates for counterparts of TeV J have been identi edat radioParedeset al. Buttet al.bandXr ays Buttet al. a Mukherjeeet al. . The origin and nature of TeV J remains unclear. It has been suggested that the nearby d. kpc massive stellar OB association Cyg OB see e.g. Kn odlseder could be an accelerator of charged cosmic rays and conse quentlyasite ofgammarayproductionAharonianet al. Butt etal. a Aharonianet al. b. This scenario h as been strengthenedby the recently discoveredspatially ext ended VHEgammarayemissionfromthedirectionoftheopenstella r clusterWesterlundAharonianet al. . Other possible explanations for the nature of TeV J have been brought forward including gammaray production i n Horns et al.XMMNewton observation of TeVJ possible jet lobes of Cyg X Aharonianet al. an un known pulsar wind nebula Bednarek or even extra galactic source candidates as suggested by Mukherjeeet al. andButtet al. b. Independent of the nature of the source two di erent gamma ray production mechanisms are generally considered. In the hadronic scenario gammarays are produced mainly via in elastic scattering of accelerated nuclei with the ambient mediumseee.g.Aharonianet al.aReimeretal. DomingoSantamar aTorres . Alternatively in t he leptonicscenariogammaraysareproducedviainverseCompton scattering of ambient photons from a population of ener getic electrons Aharonianet al. a Reimeret al. . Recently it has been suggested that excitation of giant di pole resonances of relativistic heavy nuclei in radiation domin ated environmentscouldberesponsibleforgammarayproductio nin CygOB Anchordoquiet al.. Whilethegammarayobservationssofarhavebeeninconclus ive with respecttothe originof theobservedsignalXrayobse rva tionscanprovideadditionalinformationtoidentifytheor iginof theemissionandtodiscernbetweenthetwoproposedscenari os. InthisLetterwereportthedetectionofspatiallyextendedXray emissioncoincidingwith thepositionofTeVJ . . ObservationsandDataanalyses The data were taken during two separate pointings of XMM Newton. Table summarizes the available data and congura tions of the instruments used. The data were screened for sof t protonaresfollowingthemethodsuggestedinRead Ponman . The detectors performed almost nominally CCD of theMOScamerahadbeenswitchedo andCCDofMOS showsanincreasedinstrumentalbackgroundbelowkeVwhic h is two times larger than the background seen in the adjacent CCDs and. Howeverabove keV the backgroundrate in CCD appeared consistent with the other detectors. The dat a suer from contamination of single scattering events from the brightXraysourceCygX.Thecontaminationismostpromi nent in the energybandabove keV. For this reasonthe analy sesthathavebeenperformedareconstrainedontheenergyra nge fromkeVwheretheinstrumentalbackgroundandstraylig ht contaminationfromCygXareminimal.Acloserinspection of the contamination using raytracing simulations has shown that the contribution of scattered light from Cyg X to the Xray emission seen fromTeV J is negligible.At the same time the vignetting of the telescopes is smallest in this en ergy rangeKirsch PradasKerp. Data reductionandanalyseswereperformedusingtheStanda rd XMMNewtonScienceAnalysisSoftware SASv.. .. Search fordiffuseXrayemission In an initial step of the data analyses a catalogue of source s detected in the keV energy range is assembled using the edetectchaintasksimultaneouslyfortheMOSMOSand EPIC pn cameras for each of the two exposures. The minimum detectionlikelihoodis set to a low valueof . This way . ofthedetectedsourcesareduetostatisticaluctuationsw hileat the same time more and fainter sources are detected than wit h thedefaultvalueof.Adetailedstudyofthepointsources de tected in this XMMNewtonobservationwill be presented els e where. Here the source catalogue has been used to generate model images of the point sources separately for each camera and pointing taking into account the position dependent poi ntspread functionof the XMMNewtonmirrors.These model im ages are then subtracted o the individual frames of the three cameras and for the two pointings. Within the .region cov ered by the extension of the TeV source a total energy ux of f keVergscms associated with point sources is observed. Inordertosubtracttheparticleandextragalact icpho ton background blank sky event les for the corresponding ob servation modes and lter settings have been obtained from t he XMM guest observersfacility. The blankeld data have been processed to match the observational data and the resulting im ages are subtracted o the pointings towards TeV J . TheimagesfortheMOSandMOScamerasobtainedfromthe two exposures are combined to form a background subtracted mosaic. The images of the EPIC pn camera have been omit ted becauseof artefactsresultingfromoversubtractingt he con tribution of point sources. For each of the four remaining im ages exposure maps have been generated using the SAS task eexpmap. The exposure maps are combined in a mosaic which isthentrimmedtoaminimumexposureofkseccorresponding to roughly of the peak value. The background subtracted mosaic is then divided by the exposure map to obtain an expo sure corrected background subtracted and source free ima ge. Fig. shows three images of the combined exposures of the MOS and MOS cameras before the subtraction of the model imagesofthepointsourcesaafterthesubtractionandsm ooth ing with Gaussian of xed width of arc sec b and nally the image after convolving it with a Gaussian of xed width of . arc min c. Note the presence of scattered light along ri ng segments in the southern part of Fig. a. While Fig. b shows indicationsfor the presenceof a rimlike featureresembli ngthe morphologyobservedinradiobyParedeset al.itsho uld be noted that the subtraction of pointsources has an impact on the observed morphology on angular scales small compared to the extensionof the detectedextendedemission.Fora compa ri sonwiththeextensionandmorphologyofthegammaraysourc e TeV J contours are overlaid to Fig. c. The Xray image shows an extended emission region which is colocated with TeV J and of similar extension. The exposure corrected image of the di use emission is t by a Gaussian with a width of .. arc min which corresponds to a FWHM..arcmin. .. Energyspectrum of the diffuseXrayemission In order to determine the energy spectrum of the di use Xray emissionthecontributionofthepointsourceshastoberem oved by excising regions around the sources. We use an excising re gion adapted to the point spread function and brightness of t he source. The size of the region is chosen such that the relativ e contribution of the source to the local background is less th an at the boundary of the excised region. The wings of the pointspreadfunctionleadtoacontaminationofthedetecte ddif fuse emissionwhich amountsto ofthe excesssignal seen. Thiseect ofcontaminationwouldbehowevercompensatedby the opposite eect caused by the di use emission present in the excised region and therefore excluded from the re constructedenergyspectrum.We estimatethesystematicun cer taintyofthiscontaminationtobe ofthetotal ux.Theen ergyspectraof a sourceregionwith a radiusof .centeredon the position of TeV J from the MOS and EPIC pn ftpxmm.esac.esa.int all errors given throughout the paper are to the condence of one standard deviationHorns et al.XMMNewton observation of TeVJ Fig..Background subtracted and exposure corrected images obtai ned from the combined exposures of the MOS and MOS cameras in units of counts sec arcmin. While the left image shows the emission including all poin t sources the middle image shows the image after subtractingo all point sources and smoothed with a Gaussion of arc sec wi dth. Finally the right image is obtained by smoothing the source subtracted image with a G aussian of . arc min width and changing the scaling to highl ight the extended Xray emission present. The green contours ind icate in linear spacing the signicance contour of the HEG RA observationsstartingat . cameras of the second pointing ObsID are ex tracted. The secondpointingis centered north of the centroid ofTeVJandthereforewe canchooseabackground region which is mirroredthrough the center of the eld of vie w and has a similar acceptance as the source extraction region . Usingthebackgroundregioninthesameeldofviewtheback ground estimate includes all relevant background componen ts including Xray emission from the Galactic ridge and the par ticle and instrumental background specic to this observat ion. The small azimuthal modulation of the acceptance of the MOS cameras can be neglectedalong this direction. The MOS cam era is not used because the disabled CCD unfortunatelydoe s notallowtocovertheentiresource. Theresponselesaregeneratedfortheseparticularobserv ations using the standard tools arfgenandrmfgen. Finally the ge ometrical areas of the source and background regions are cal culated taking gaps between the CCDs bad pixels and point sourceexclusionregionsintoaccount.Theresultingbackg round subtracted Xray spectrum is t with a powerlaw as well as an optically thin hot plasma model apec including photoelectric absorption phabs. The spectral tting of the two spectra was doneusingthexspecv..pspectralttingpackageArnaud .ThetdescribesthedatawellseeTableforasummar y ofthet parametersonlystatistical errorsarequoted. In order to estimate the inuence of faint unresolved point sources present in the stellar cluster we have reduced Xra y imaging data taken with the Chandra satellite Obs. fo r . ksec on TeV J and Obs. for . ksec in the southwest of TeV J centered on the core of CygOB.BaseduponacomparisonoftheChandraandXMM NewtonsourcecataloguesandthestudyoftheXraysourcepo p ulation present in the Cyg OB cluster Colomboetal. we estimate that point sources below the XMMNewton detec tion limit can contribute up to of the observed di use emission. It is however not straightforward to correct the ob served excess for the unresolved point sources detected wit h Chandra as the ux of the sources is generally found to vary with time. We estimate the systematic uncertainty on the ux conservatively to be combining the inuence of the unreTable . Summary of observation times and congurations on the target TeV J .All instrumentswere operatedin full frame mode with a medium lter. The exposure quoted in parenthesisisfortheEPICpncamera. ObsID Date R.A. Dec. Exposure J J ksec .. .. Table.SummaryofthetresultsoftheXrayenergyspectrum withapowerlawmodel powerlaw orthermalemission apec with xed solar abundances of the plasma including photo electricabsorption phabs. Parameter Value powerlaw Value apec NHcm .. .. kBTkeV .. .. f keVergscms .. .. redd.o.f. . . solved point sources uncertaintieson the background subtractionaswellasthetailsofthepointspreadfunc tions of excised point sources . The total unabsorbed energy ux derived from the model t see Table is found to bef..sys.statergscms. . Conclusions The XMMNewton observations presented here indicate the presence of an extended FWHM . arc min Xray source colocated with the rst unidentied VHE gammaray source TeV J discovered with the HEGRA air Cherenkov telescope system. The size of the Xray source is similar to t he one of TeV J. The energy spectrum can be t by a powerlawmodelorbyathermalemissionmodelwithaplasma temperature of kBT keV. The unabsorbed energy ux of Horns et al.XMMNewton observation of TeVJ f ergcm s E eVCXHAMI MIEG J ISGRI from pp eSynchrotron sec. e Fig..ThespectralenergydistributionofTeV J the bowtie indicatesthe energyspectrumas measuredwith XMM Newton including systematic and statistical uncertaintie s. The lines indicate the result of a model calculation for a hadron ic gammarayandneutrinoproductionscenariofora continuou sly active accelerator of protonsup to a maximumenergyof PeV at an age of tage yrs and magnetic eld B mG. The radio ux point of a possible nonthermal extended radio source at cm Paredesetal. is assumed to be an upper limit to the actual radio emission associated with TeV J. The upper limits between . keV CX Chandra and keV ISGRI INTEGRAL are taken from Butt etal. a. The energy spectrum of the EGRET source EG J Hartmanet al. is considered to be an upperlimit.TheMilagroMIupperlimitistheintegratede mis sioninaxregionAbdoet al.whilethelowerlimit MI is scaled to the solid angle covered by TeV J assuming a uniform surface brightness. The upper limit from the HEGRAAIROBICC HA wide angle Cherenkov detector istakenfromAharonianet al.. f ergcm s E eVCXHAMI MIEG J ISGRIYoung source yrs Old source kyrs Fig..In the leptonic scenario the data are described well by a youngsourceofanageofyrsamagneticeldof BG andanenergydensityoftheseedphotoneldof wIReVcm withagreybodytemperatureof TK.Asanalternativean older source at an age of kyrs is shown BGwIR eVcm. For a description of the multiwavelength data see thecaptionofFig..the Xray source in the energyrangefrom keV is a factor of smaller than the one observed from TeV J at energiesfromTeV. We note that the observed extended Xray emission could in principlebe a so far unknownpopulationof faint Xraysourc es that are by chance distributed at an angular size which is sim ilar to the one of TeV J . The energy spectrum of these sources would have to be di erent from the bulk of the stellar Xray sources detected from Cyg OB Colomboet al. which on average show a thermal spectrum with kBT ... keV. Taking these considerations into account we con clude that the observed extended Xray emission is the Xray counterpartofTeVJ . InitialmodelingoftheXrayandgammarayenergyspectrau s ingahadronicgammarayproductionscenarioindicatestha tthe observed spectra can be naturally explained by a young a few kyrsPevatronaccelerator.Theobservationofsynchrot ronX ray emission upto keV constrainsthe productof the square ofmaximumenergyofacceleratedprotons E maxandmagnetic eld B to exceed E maxB PeVmG. In this picture the gammaray energy spectra would continue without cuto well beyond TeV. The hard Xray emission from a similar source size region as the gammaray emission is a natural predictio n withinthismodelwheretheXraysareproducedbysynchrotr on emission of secondary electrons. Notably in the frame of th is modelthe extendedgammarayemission foundby the Milagro collaboration would be explained by gammarays produced by accelerated particlesof energies TeV which have already escapedthe accelerator. A leptonicscenarioprovidesa validexplanationof the obse rva tions as well see Fig. . In this scenario a young accelera tor withalowmagneticeldofafew Gacceleratingelectronsfol lowingapowerlawdistributionwith dNdEEreachingup to energies of a few TeV can provide a good t to the X ray and gammaray data. In contrary to the hadronic scenario the gammaray energy spectrum above TeV is expected to be rather soft due to unavoidableKleinNishina suppressi onof inverse Compton scattering. Furthermore the seed photon d en sity has to be higher than the average value in the interstell ar medium which is not unlikely given the possible proximity t o the Cyg OB stellar association and the large stellar extinc tion towards that region indicating high density of dust. In the lep tonic scenario the Xray spectrum can be expected to vary at dierent parts of the source due to cooling e ects. More Xray observationswill berequiredtodetectspectralvariabili ty. Finally neutrinoobservationswill provedecisive to disc ern be tween the two emission scenarios since neutrinos are only e x pected in the hadronic scenario. Even though the neutrino ux calculatedhereisverylikelynotdetectablewiththecomin ggen eration of neutrino telescopes like IceCube Achterberget al. it may be that the gammarayux detected with Milagro from the same region is tracing the high energy particles whi ch havealreadylefttheacceleratorandllamuchlargervolum e.In this case the region aroundTeV Jwould be a pow erful high energy neutrino source and would be detectable wi th futureneutrinotelescopesBeacomKistler . ItshouldbenotedthattheobservationsofTeVJ car ried out with XMMNewton are so far the deepest observations available for any of the unidentied VHE gammaray sources. It will be interesting to perform similar observations to se arch forfaintextendedXraycounterpartsofotherunidentie dVHE gammaraysources.Horns et al.XMMNewton observation of TeVJ Acknowledgements. We acknowledge the support of the Deutsches Zentrum f ur Luft und Raumfahrt under grant number OR and the support of the Eberhard Karls Universit at T ubingen. We wish to thank Olaf Reimer and Facundo Albacete for providing the source lists found in the Chandra observa tions and Josep Paredes for making their results available p rior to publication. Thisresearch has madeuseof NASAsAstrophysics DataSyste m. Wethank the anonymous referee for valuable comments. 