 The Monoceros Ring is an overdensity of stars in the plane of t he Galaxy at a galacto centric distance of approximately kpc. It was discovered by the Sloan Digital Sky Survey SDSS and its existence was promptly conrmed by two i ndependent collaborations . The Monoceros Ring has been observed over degrees in galactic longitude lin the Galactic anticenter direction l and appears to be circular. Assuming it is a complete circle the total mass in the Ring is estimated to be in the range M in ref. and Min ref. . The scale height of the Ring stars in the directio n perpendicular to the Galactic plane is estimated to be .. kpc in ref. .. kpc in ref. and .. kpc in ref. . The scale height in the direction parallel t o the plane is also of order kpc. The stars in the Ring move with spee d approximately kms in the direction of galactic rotation . Their velocity dispersion along the line of sight is small. It was estimated to be between and kms in ref. and kms in ref. . The most widely discussed interpretation of the Monoceros R ing is that it is a stream of stars resulting from the tidal disruption of a Galactic sa tellite . An alternative proposal is that the Ring is a manifestation of the Galactic w arp . In this paper we explore a dierent proposal altogether namely that the Mon oceros Ring of stars formed as a result of the gravitational forces exerted by the second ca ustic ring of dark matter in the Milky Way . Caustic rings of dark matter had been predicted prior t o the discovery of the Mono ceros Ring to lie in the Galactic plane at radii given by the a pproximate law an kpc n where n ... Since the Monoceros Ring is located near the secon d n caustic ring of dark matter it is natural to ask whether the former is a consequence of the latter. In our proposal the position of the Monoceros Ring in the Gal actic plane and its kpc radius are immediately accounted for. Dark matter caustics are an unavoidable consequence of the f act that cold collisionless dark matter CDM lies on a dim. hypersurface in dim. pha se space . The ow of dark matter in and out of the gravitational potenti al well of a galaxy necessarily produces caustics. These caustics are of two types inner an d outer. The inner caustics are rings when the angular momentum distribution of the dark matter is dominated by net overall rotation . The singularity structure of causti c rings was discussed in detail in ref. . The ring radii were predicted in ref. using the sel fsimilar infall model of galactic halo formation generalized to allow the dark matte r particles to have nonzero angular momentum . Evidence for caustic rings of dark ma tter distributed according to the prediction of the selfsimilar infall model was found in the rotation curves of exterior galaxies and the rotation curve of the Milky Way . Fig. shows the transverse section of a caustic ring. Fig. a shows the ow of dark matter in the neighborhood of the caustic whereas Fig. b shows the denition of its radius aand its transverse sizes pandq. As was mentioned already the selfsimilar infall model predicts that the radius aof the second caustic ring of dark matter is approximately kpc in our galaxy. The transverse sizes pandqare not predicted by the selfsimilar infall model. However for reasons explained in Section II the exp ectation for pandqis that they are of order kpc for n . So the transverse sizes of the second caustic ring of dark matter are of order the transverse sizes of the Monoceros Ring. More over for q kpc the caustic ring mass enclosed within the triangular shape of Fig. b i s approximately Msee Section II. Thus the total mass of the n caustic ring of dark matter is of the same order of magnitude as the observed total mass of the Monoceros Ring . One might ask whether it is possible to interpret the Monocer os Ring as a caustic in a ow of stars. Indeed it is reasonable to assume that the ow of dark matter that forms the n caustic ring is accompanied by a ow of stars occupying the same dim. hypersurface in phase space. Thus the proposal that the Monoceros Ring is a caustic in a ow of stars would explain equally well why the Monoceros Ring is in the Ga lactic plane and why its radius is kpc. However the proposal runs into diculties . The rst diculty is that the selfsimilar infall model which predicts the kpc radius of the n caustic ring also predicts that the matter in that caustic moves with a velocit y of approximately kms in the direction of Galactic rotation see Section II. This is inconsistent with the kms observed velocity of Monoceros Ring stars in the direction o f galactic rotation. A second diculty is that the matter in the caustic ring has an eectiv e radial velocity dispersion of order kms whereas the radial velocity dispersion of Mo noceros Ring stars is only of order kms. Thus the proposal that the Monoceros Ring is a c austic of stars appears untenable. As mentioned already the proposal we explore in stead is that the Monoceros Ring is caused by the gravitational eld of the n caustic ring of dark matter. We will nd that there are two apparently viable mechanisms b y which the n caustic ring of dark matter may cause the Monoceros Ring of stars. The rst mechanism is enhanced star formation at the caustic radius because viscous forces on the gas in the neighborhood of the caustic drive it towards ra. The second mechanism is the adiabatic deformation of the orbits of ordinary disk stars by the caustic ring of dark m atter. We will show that the increase in star density at the location of the caustic as a re sult of this second mechanism is of order . The paper is organized as follows In Section II we give a sel fcontained and hopefully pedagogical description of the properties of caustic rings of dark matter including the pre dictions of the selfsimilar infall model for the parameter s that characterize the caustic rings the observational evidence for caustic rings of dark matter and the expected properties of then ring. In Section III we describe the gravitational eld o f a caustic ring of dark matter and the perturbation it causes to the galactic rotati on curve. We then analyze two mechanisms by which the second caustic ring of dark matter ma y cause the Monoceros Ring the migration of gas to a sharp minimum in the angular ve locity at raimplying enhanced star formation there and the adiabatic deformati on of ordinary disk star orbits by the slowly growing caustic. Section IV provides concludi ng remarks. Axial symmetry is assumed throughout unless stated otherwise. II. CAUSTIC RING PROPERTIES Cold collisionless dark matter CDM particles lie on a di m. hypersurface in phase space . We refer to this dim. hypersurface as th e phase space sheet. At the location of a galactic halo the phase space sheet is wound up so as to cover physical space multiple times. This phase space structure implies that the velocity distribution of CDM particles is everywhere discrete and that there are surface s in physical space called caustics where the density of dark matter particles is very large. Dis crete ows and caustics are a robust prediction of cold dark matter cosmology . The re ader may wish to consult ref. for background information and a list of 