 Since the early s more than planets have been discov ered orbiting other stars. Roughly four fths of the planets that have been discovered a re at least half as massive as Jupiter and about a quarter of the known planets orbit ext remely close to their par ent star . AU. The Jupitermass planets that are in close orbits are h ighly ir radiated by their stars and are therefore called Hot Jupite rs. Fourteen Hot Jupiters transit along the line of sight between Earth and their star Charbonneau et al. Henry et al. Konacki et al. Bouchy et al. Pon t et al. Konacki et al. Udalski et al. abc Alonso et a l. Bouchy et al. b McCullough et al. ODonovan et al. Bakos et al. Collier Cameron et al. . Observations of the transiting planets have conrme d their similarity to Jupiter by revealing that these are gas giant planets with radii compa rable to or somewhat larger than Jupiters Charbonneau et al. Henry et al. Gaudi . The eects of the tidal torques experienced by an orbiting bo dy have been studied for a long time for an early seminal analyis see Goldreich Pea le . Such torques tend to synchronize a satellites rotation rate to its orbital ra te and if the torque is sucient this synchronization is achieved and the orbiter is said to b e tidally locked as the Earths Moon is. The Hot Jupiterclass extrasolar planets are thoug ht to orbit suciently close to their stars that their tidal locking timescales are much sho rter than the ages of the planets. The planets then are expected to be tidally locked to the st ars with one hemisphere in permanent day and the other in permanent night Harrington e t al. . A tidally locked Hot Jupiter will have a permanent sharp cont rast in temperature between the substellar point and the night side which must h ave a profound inuence on the atmospheric dynamics. Showman Guillot make s imple predictions of the daynight temperature dierence K and the speed of winds up to km s and their detailed threedimensional simulations agree w ith their estimates. Shallowwater simulations by Cho et al. predict longitudinally ave raged zonal wind speeds of up to m s with local winds approaching . km sunder some assumtions. Simulations by Cooper Showman predict a superrotational jet i .e. blowing eastward where north is dened by the righthand rule that blows the hottes t part of the planet down stream by about from the substellar point. Their simulations predict super sonic winds exceeding km sat high latitudes high in the atmosphere where the optical depth is low and winds exceeding km sat pressures near the photosphere. Transmission spectroscopy is a way to probe the atmospheres of these planets. Charbonneau et al. were the rst to detect an absorption feature in what i s probably the atmosphere of HDb when they found that the eective radius of the pl anet increases slightly at the wavelength of a strong sodium absorption doublet the sodiu m D lines at nm. In addition VidalMadjar et al. have reported a n umber of absorption features in HDs transit spectra that are due to various species including hydrogen Lyman al pha neutral carbon oxygen and sulfur and some ionizatio n states of carbon nitrogen and silicon in a hot exosphere that is probably only loosely bou nd to the planet. Intriguingly through analyzing the red and nearIR portion of HDb s transit spectrum Barman found a detection of atmospheric water vapor. Several measurement s of the planets emission spectrum however have found results th at seem to be inconsistent with high water abundance high in the atmosphere Grillmair et al . Richardson et al. . Initial work by Seager Sasselov and a comprehensive study by Brown hereafter B have described various other consideration s that should aect the details of transit spectra including the orbital motion of a planet a few tens of kilometers per second in the radial direction the rotation of the planet a few kilometers per second at the equator according to the hypothesis that the planet is t idally locked and winds on the planets surface in Bs analysis up to km s. These physical eects should tend to broaden or impose Doppler shifts on absorption features d ue to the planets atmosphere. B constructed an impressively detailed model of radiativ e transfer through a Hot Jupiters atmosphere assuming various models of zonal window super imposed on an equatorial bulk rotation speed of veq km s which is approximately the value for HDb under the assumption that it is tidally locked in its . day orbit. He nds the height of the cloud deck to be the most important parameter that aects the trans mission of light through the planets atmosphere. The original discovery of the roughly Jupitermass planet i n a close day orbit around Pegasi Mayor Queloz prompted interest in t he dynamics and structure that must govern a highly insolated gas giant planet Guillo t et al. . Observations of the transiting Hot Jupiters heightened this interest when t hey revealed a puzzling feature of these planets at least several of them are a bit puer than Jupiter with diameters ranging from slightly larger than Jupiters to as much as larger. It is not clear what provides the extra source of energy that allows some pla nets to maintain such large radii. It has been suggested that if a Jovian planet migrates very quickly from its pre sumed formation location at least several AU from its star t o its eventual several day orbit then it might reach its nal home before it has cooled enough t o shrink to Jupiters ra dius. Accordingly some authors have investigated the migr ation processes that lead gas giant planets to such close orbits as have been found e.g. Tr illing et al. . Others have investigated various ways a gas giant could be reheated once it ends up near its star Guillot Showman Burrows et al. Laughlin et al. Bodenheimer et al. Guillot Burrows et al. Chabrier Barae . Although various physi cal mechanisms have been suggested as the apparently missin g energy source that allows the unexpectedly large radii sometimes seen the lesson of thes e investigations in toto is that it is not easy to explain the inated sizes either in terms of th e greater stellar ux that these planets experience by virtue of being so close to their stars or in terms of their evolutionary migratory histories. A recent paper by Winn Holman p ropose that contrary to the commonly accepted paradigm Hot Jupiters might be trapp ed in a Cassini state with large obliquity in which the spinaxis precesses in resona nce with the orbit but lies nearly in the orbital plane. Such a state might be stable against per turbation and yet able to generate sucient internal energy to increase a gas giant pl anets radius to the observed values. In light of an even more recent analysis by Levrard et al. however it appears that the probability of capture into a Cassini state resona nce is quite small for a planet with semimajor axis a. AU. Furthermore Fabrycky et al. argue that even if a planet is captured into Cassini state it is likely to remai n there for a time that is short relative to the age of the system. Highresolution transit spectra that have high signalto noise ratios will allow us to distinguish between various models of orbit rotation and weather as discussed by B. Because the orbit is known to high accuracy and the predicti ons of the eects of weather or climate are highly uncertain as described above we wi ll focus in this paper on the much more easily predicted eect of a planets rotation on a t ransitspectrum. If we neglect winds then the largeobliquity Cassini state described by Winn Holman should have a spectral signature that is very similar to that of a non rotating model. In contrast the rotation of a tidally locked planet should impose a Doppl er distortion that is roughly an overall redshift during ingress as the planet is just enter ing the stellar disk and a similar distortion that is roughly an overall blueshift during egre ss as the planet is just exiting the disk. During midtransit the spectral distortion is more s imilar to rotational broadening. In the present investigation we address whether there is any h ope that these spectral distortions from tidallylocked rotation can be observed. We nd that these shifts will be dicult to detect with curren t technology but perhaps not insurmountably so at least with technology that might b e available in the notto distant future. In a single transit observations of HD with a m telescope that has a highresolution optical spectrograph with good throughput could only show the inuence of tidally locked rotation at the .level. With ultrahighresolution and good throughput this eect would still only show up at the . level. In less than a year the signal of rotation could be pre sent at ve times the noise SN . Of course a telescope with larger collecting area hig her spectral resolution or better throughput would cause the signal to be apparent at that signicance level in less time. Other studies have approached the problem of determining th e rotation rate from a dierent angle. Seager Hui and Barnes Fortney suggest that an oblate spheroid will have a dierent transit light curve from a perf ect sphere and so measuring the oblateness from transit photometry will provide a handle on the rotation rate. The oblateness is somewhat degenerate with several other parameters that a re not perfectly known however so they conclude that it would be dicult to actually determi ne that rotation rate in this manner. The method we describe here could eventually prove t o be an important complement to other observations to constrain the rotation rate. In the remainder of this paper we address this idea in detail . One complication that we discuss below is that the technique of this paper is not imm une from several near degeneracies among the many attributes of transiting extra solar planets that inuence light curves or spectra. Although it is likely that current or near future instruments will be sensitive enough that the spectral distortion imposed by HD bs rotation if it is tidally locked is visible it might still be very challenging to dis cern the ngerprint of rotation from other attributes that aect the spectra at a similar level. I n this paper we tackle the forward problem of calculating the amount of distortion tha t is caused by rotation. The inverse problem determining from observations whether a p lanet is tidally locked is more dicult and should be the topic of a future study. The structure of the rest of this paper is as follows In we describe qualitatively what happens to the starlight received on Earth when a planet tran sits its star we give a rough order of magnitude estimate of the the magnitude and detecta bility of the spectral distortions caused by tidally locked rotation and we briey describe so me technological progress and remaining challenges relevant to our task of deducing bulk m otions in a planets atmosphere from transit spectra. In we describe our computational model of a transit spectrum . In we describe the results of our model according to various a ssumed input parameters. In we discuss the scaling of SN on various model parameters a nd we address the prospects of actually observationally determining whether a transit ting planet is tidally locked. In we conclude by describing various ways to boost our predicte d SN to a more optimistic value. . Overview of the Problem The practical feasibility of the investigation we undertak e depends on a few factors understanding the various detailed processes that aect th e starlight that reaches Earth when a planet transits its star the magnitude of the distort ion that tidally locked rotation induces and the technology available to measure such disto rtions. In this section we give an overview of these three factors in particular in . we give a simple estimate of the results that we will later in calculate in detail. .. Relevant Processes A planet transiting in front of its star aects the starlight that ultimately reaches Earth in many ways. The motion of the planets atmosphere rotatio n and winds is a small perturbation on top of several more dominant eects. We ther efore summarize below the physical processes that are at least as signicant as the ee ct of tidally locked rotation. Figure schematically represents this situation and capt ures nearly all of the processes described below a rotating planet of exaggerated relativ e size transits in front of a rotating star. The gure depicts a snapshot partway through ingress when half of the planet is in front of the stellar disk. The white circle indicates a hypothetical sharp demarcati on between the opaque part of the planet in black and the optically thi n part labeled Atmosphere described further below. Atmosphere Planet Star Fig. . Rotating planet beginning to transit in front of rot ating star. The vertical black arrows represent the rotation axes of the planet and the star and the curved arrows indicate the direction of rotation for each. The Xs on the rightside s of both the planet and the star indicate regions that are receding from the observer an d are therefore redshifted the unmarked left sides of the planet and the star are moving towa rd the observer and are therefore blueshifted. The white circle surrounding the op aque black part of the planet denotes the cloud deck or the boundary between the partiall y transparent and the fully opaque portions of the planets disk. The planet is orbiting in the same sense as both it and the star are rotating. The planet is shown above the star s midplane to represent the inclination of the orbit relative to the lineofsight. .Geometric Occultation The largest eect is an overall dimming by a factor of roughly the ratio of the area of The planet is above the stars equator to represent a slight i nclination in its orbit. the planet to that of the star RpR. Since stars are not perfectly uniform disks but instead tend to darken toward the limb at most visible wav elengths the fractional dimming due to being in the planets shadow tends to be slight ly less than the ratio of the areas when the planet is near the edge of the stellar dis k and slightly more than this ratio when the planet is near the center. .Stellar Wobble The primary spectral eect of the planet orbiting the star is the radial velocity wobble induced by the planets gravity. This periodic spectral shi ft is of course in eect during the transit when for a closein planet like HDb it h as an inuence on the order of m s. This eect is a redshift as the planet begins to transit acro ss the disk during ingress and a blueshift during egress. .RossiterMcLaughlin Eect A more subtle eect arises because during the transit the p lanet moves across and therefore blocks parts of the star that have dierent reces sional velocities. If as is expected the planets orbit is aligned with the stars spin then during ingress the planet is blocking a part of the star that is slightly blueshi fted and during egress it is blocking a part of the star that is slightly redshifted. Figu re illustrates the planet blocking some of the bluest parts of the star during ingress. The parts of the star that are occluded during ingressegres s have spectra that are blueredshifted by a velocity that is approximately the equ atorial rotational speed of the star or about km sfor a Sunlike star. As the gure indicates during ingressegress the integrated spectrum of the remaining unblocked parts of the star is on average slightly redderbluer than it would be if the plan et were entirely transparent. Therefore during ingress the centroids of stellar lines a re shifted slightly to the red and during egress the centroids are correspondingly shifte d to the blue. This socalled RossiterMcLaughlin eect RME describe d originally by Rossiter and McLaughlin in the case of eclipsing binary stars adds to the shifts already caused by the radial velocity induced by the planet s gravity described in . above. The RME has been described in depth more recently in the context of extrasolar planets by Ohta et al. Gim enez a nd Gaudi Winn . These centroidshifts are expected to be comparable in magn itude to the radial velocity wobble from the planets gravity and can be roughly estimat ed as vRM km sRpR m s In fact the amount of the shift can be predicted precisely fo r a given orientation of the planets orbit and so measuring the shift is tantamount to m easuring the alignment between the stars spin and the planets orbit. Three years a go Winn et al. rst found that the spin of HD and the orbital plane of its pl anet are nearly aligned. The degree of alignment has been measured for two other syste ms Winn et al. found that the spin of HD and its planet are also nearly aligned and Narita et al. measured a misalignment between these two vectors b yin the TrES system. .Planets Atmospheric Opacity Furthermore a gasgiant planets opacity surely does not h ave a perfectly sharp dis continuity at an outer boundary as a billiard ball does. Ins tead it has an extended atmosphere in which the opacity must vary more or less smooth ly. There may be a cloud layer below which the planet is entirely opaque to ta ngential rays and above which the opacity varies smoothly. Most critical to our inve stigation at a given radius the planets opacity to tangential lines of sight must vary w ith wavelength depending on the contents of its atmosphere. At wavelengths of strong a tomic or molecular tran sitions the planets atmosphere will be more opaque than at other wavelengths. As a result the eective radius of the planet or the radius at wh ich the optical depth along a tangential ray is of order unity is greater at some wavelen gths than at others. These eects have been described in detail by B. .Planets Orbital Motion The motion of the planets atmosphere must inuence the tran sit spectrum in several delicate ways. As B points out there are three main mechan isms by which the motion of a planets atmosphere relative to its star can aec t the spectrum the planets orbital velocity along the lineofsight the planets po ssibly tidally locked rotation and winds in its atmosphere. The largest eect of these three is the orbital velocity which imposes a bulk blueredshift during ingressegress o f km sto spectral lines arising from the planets atmosphere. These shifts ar e of opposite sign to the radial velocity wobble and to the shifts from the RME and the refore tend to lessen the apparent RME slightly. .Planets Atmospheric Motion The most dynamically interesting and subtlest eects are those caused by the plane tary rotational velocity and atmospheric winds. Since a tid ally locked planet rotates in the same sense as it orbits the rotational velocity of its ou tside edge has the same sign as its orbital velocity and the rotational velocity of its i nside edge has the opposite sign. As a result during the beginning of ingress and the end of egress when only the inside edge of the planet is over the star tidally locked rot ation will impose a spec tral distortion that is in the opposite sense of that caused b y the bulk orbital velocity described in . above and that is in the same sense as the RM E the distortions are roughly equivalent to a relative redshift during ingres s graphically represented in Figure and a relative blueshift during egress. During mid transit with some parts of the rotating planets atmosphere moving toward and other parts away from the star relative to an otherwise identical but nonrotating planet the overall inuence of the planets rotation is approximately equivalent to rotation al broadening. Winds complicate the picture even further. It is likely that winds tend to rush from the substellar hot spot to the colder night side of the planet . With the substellar point on the opposite side of the planet from Earth during a transit this corresponds to winds rushing toward us at several hundred to several thousa nd meters per second. This would tend to blueshift the spectrum throughout the tra nsit. Zonal wind bands somewhat similar to those on Jupiter but with much higher spe eds or other more detailed winds can have an even more intricate eect. Other interesting phenomena that primarily aect a transit light curve rather than the spectrum include starspots Silva atmospheri c lensing Hui Seager and nitespeedoflight eects Loeb . Although Win n Holman describe a possible conguration Cassini state that would produc e a spectral signature that is nearly identical to what would be expected from a nonrotati ng planet the likelihood that any Hot Jupiters are in such a conguration might be low and i t seems quite likely that sometransiting planets are not in this state. Nonetheless the m otion of a transiting planets atmosphere rotational wind or other is clearly interes ting and the basic technique that we describe below is applicable to any model of atmospheric m otion. .. Preview of Results A rough estimate of the velocityshift that is imposed durin g ingress to the centroids of the stellar Na Dlines by the planets tidally locked rota tion on top of the RME and the shift from the planets orbital velocity both of which woul d be present even if the planet were not rotating is the following vparenleftBig angbracketleftcosangbracketright parenrightBig parenleftbigg Rp Rparenrightbigg parenleftbiggRpatm Rpparenrightbigg veq . m s . m s. In this equation is a planetcentered azimuthal angle RpandRare the planets and stars radius respectively atmis the height of the planets atmosphere and veqis the equatorial rotation speed. The rotation speed at angle isveqcos. We take the average of cos from to to get the average planetary rotation speed. We have used atm km or times the presumed scale height of km because the so dium lines are so heavily saturated that at the assumed abundance and cloud deck heigh t in our model the line cores do not become optically thin until that height. Fortney describes in detail how the optical depth along tangential rays is greater than the opti cal depth on normal rays. The product atmparenleftbigg Rp RparenrightbiggparenleftbiggRpatm Rpparenrightbigg parenleftbiggRp Rparenrightbiggparenleftbiggatm Rpparenrightbigg is the ratio of the area of the portion of the planets atmosph ere that is in front of the star halfway through ingress to the total area of the disk of the st ar. Based on this estimate we expect a maximum velocity shift of v cm s. If we take into account that HDbs orbit is actually slightly inclined relative t o the line of sight the cosine average decreases to . and the total estimate decreases to cm s. This estimate is in reasonably good agreement with the centroidshifts predic ted by the full model calculation below cm s the dierence between the estimates is most likely due to t he dierence between the shapes of the stellar and planetary lines. We now estimate the signaltonoise ratio for the detectabi lity of this eect in an ob servation of duration t with a telescope that has diameter Dand throughput eciency . The signal is the distortion of the spectrum relative to a no nrotating planet and for now we will assume that the noise is dominated by photon noise . If a spectrum F with a symmetric absorption feature of depth Fcentered at is redshifted by an amount to hatwideFF what is the integrated absolute dierence FhatwideFover some wavelength range Lcentered on If the absorption feature is wide compared with then by symmetry SintegraldisplayL LFFd integraldisplayL FFd and if is small then SintegraldisplayL Fd F. We may now estimate the SN of our eect for a single absorpti on line using the lesson of equation provided we know the absolute normal ization of the stellar spectrum the number of photons per unit wavelength. A spherical bla ckbody of radius Rand temperature T at distance dfrom the telescope has a photon number ux at wavelength of dN dBTparenleftbigg hcparenrightbiggparenleftbiggR dparenrightbigg D c exphckTparenleftbiggRD dparenrightbigg whereBis the Planck function. Since the fractional decrease in the spectrum at the linecenter is approximately atm we may express the parameter Ffrom equation as FatmdNd. Similarly since the rootmeansquare velocity shift du ring ingress isangbracketleftvangbracketright m s m s we may express the parameter as angbracketleftvangbracketrightc. The distortion the signal from a single line can therefor e be estimated as SNparenleftBigg atmdN dparenrightBigg t catm exphckTparenleftbiggRD dparenrightbigg t. The shotnoise is the square root of the number of photons in a wavelength range Lroughly equal to the FWHM of the line or about km sfor a heavily saturated line such as the Na D lines under consideration NradicalBigg dN dLt radicalBigg Lct exphckTparenleftbiggRD dparenrightbigg . We estimate the total signaltonoise ratio arising from a s ingle absorption line during an ingress integration of duration t to be roughly SN atmradicalbig exphckTparenleftbigg parenrightbiggparenleftBiggradicalbigg ct LparenrightBiggparenleftbiggRD dparenrightbigg parenleftbig .parenrightbigparenleftbig .parenrightbigparenleftbig .parenrightbigparenleftbig .parenrightbig .. The above calculation uses parameters for HD and its p lanet a sodium D line and a m telescope nm t sR .cmT K d pc andD cm. For two identical absorption lines we gain a factor of in SN and for egress we gain another factor of giving a total onetransit SN of roughly . not counting the additional signal available during midtrans it see further discussion below. This SN ratio is in principle independent of the spectral re solution of the spectrograph for suciently high spectral resolution. For low spectral reso lution however the SN could be lower than this estimate below we conclude that the SN los es its dependence on resolving power for spectral resolution . There were several optimistic assumptions that went into th is estimate. Still this rough estimate of the degree to which a planets rotation inuence s its transit spectrum indicates that the more indepth study that we perform below is warrant ed. We write m s because the mean value of cosfrom to is .. Available Technology Detecting the centroidshifts caused by tidally locked rot ation m s will require very precise measurements of stellar transit spectra. Obta ining such high precision spectra will be quite challenging for a number of reasons several o f which were described in the groundbreaking paper by Butler et al. that analyzes t he limits of Doppler precision. Of particular concern stellar pulsations and turbulent mo tions in stellar photospheres can cause small regions of the stellar disk to move at up to m sDravins Ulrich . These motions tend to average out to produce stellar s pectra that are largely stable but it is likely that at least some giant convection cells are not small relative to the size of a planet and these could introduce a contaminating source o f noise when they are located behind the planet or its atmosphere. Butler et al. rev iewed what was then known about the variability of stellar lineproles the upshot i s that linewidths may vary by up to several meters per second over several years but it is not clear to what extent spurious apparent velocity shifts may be induced by convection and s uch stellar jitters may prove to be a signicant source of noise that would render it dicult t o measure sub meterpersecond velocityshifts. More recently Bouchy et al. a have actually achieved sub meterper second accuracy with the HARPS instrument spectral resolu tion of and they have found a dispersion in nightaveraged radial velocity m easurements for a particular star HD of . cm sfor nights when they took many observations. Since in our situation taking spectra during ingress say we hav e minutes not hours available the rms scatter in ingressaveraged radial velocity measur ements is likely to be larger than what they found. In addition to the diculties posed by sever al systematic sources of noise achieving sucient photon statistics will be dicult for tw o reasons for a given throughput eciency higher spectral resolution means fewer photons per bin an dtends to decrease with increasing spectral resolution RS. By the mids the timeless quest for highresolution sp ectrographs reached a mile stone at the AngloAustralian Telescope with the developme nt of UHRF and its resolving power of up to Diego et al. . Despite impressive throughput rela tive to previous endeavors however its eciency was insucient t o obtain the sub decameterper second Doppler precision on a V star that would be required for planet searches. With a RS spectrograph built at Steward Observatory Ge et al. obtained stellar spectra with RS and throughput of .. Furthermore they predicted tha t by op timizing their technology they could increase the throughp ut to . More recently Ge et al. detected a new planet around HD with the Exop lanet Tracker instrument at Kitt Peak. This instrument has resolution of RS and total throughput of . Plans for a spectrograph that has resolving power of on a thirty meter telescope Tokunaga et al. give cause for optimism that increase d aperture area and eciency feeding high and ultrahighresolution spectrographs will in coming years provide accurate enough spectra that tidally locked rotation of HDb ha s a detectable inuence. . A Model of a Planetary Transit We consider the spectrum of a star whose companion planet tra nsits across the face of the stellar disk from Earths perspective. The primary e ect of the planet is to reduce the stellar ux at all wavelengths but the planets chemica l composition internal structure and rotation rate inuence the spectrum in wavelengthdepe ndent ways. Since each of these factors and others too such as the stars rotation inuen ces the observed spectrum we built a model that incorporates the many parameters related to each process. The star and the planet are both assumed to rotate as solid bodies with no other nonthermal motion in their atmospheres. Since deviations from pure solid body ro tation are likely to be no more than over the disk of the star e.g. the Suns equatorto pole variation in rotation rate is about as per Howard et al. this is probabl y a reasonable assumption for the star. For the planet this assumption might fail bec ause windspeeds in excess of the equatorial rotation speed of veq km sare predicted by many models as described in above. Still when making this initial study of the spectra l eect of the motion of a transiting planets atmosphere separating rotation from other processes makes the problem more tractable. We set parameter values to match measured va lues from the HDb system where possible. The planet is modeled as an inner component that is entirely o paque and an outer component that is isothermal and drops o exponentially. We compute the wavelength dependent optical depth due to the sodium Ddoublet at nm in the planets atmo sphere important parameters include the temperature and d ensity of the planets atmosphere and its Nacontent. We use the Voigt prole as described by e.g. Press Rybicki to calculate the optical depth to absorption along the line of sight. As the planet transits the star there are four points of con tact between the planet and the star really between their projections on the sky w hen the disk of the planet rst touches the disk of the star when the planet is rst entirely over the stellar disk when the planet is last entirely over the stellar disk and when the pl anet last touches the stellar disk. We will additionally sometimes refer to .th contact halfway between rst and second contact and analogously to .th and .th contact. As described in above the type of distortion that a planets rotation impo ses relative to a nonrotating planet changes depending on when during th e transit the observation is made. During ingress or egress the rotation of a tidally loc ked planets atmosphere will impose a distortion similar to an overall shift relative to a nonrotating planet redshift during ingress blueshift during egress. When the planet is in midtransit in the middle of the stellar disk the overall distortion to the spectrum i mposed by its rotation is akin to a stars rotational broadening. Since the linecenters o f the lines we are considering are heavily saturated and therefore at at their cores rotatio nal broadening has the somewhat counterintuitive eect of steepening the cores of the prol es while broadening the wings. We will discuss this in greater detail in the next section. Al though the type of distortion is dierent during ingress and egress from during midtransit it turns out that the amount of distortion in terms of SN ratio is nearly constant throug hout transit. This too we will discuss in below. We simulate the HDb system with a .RJplanet in a . day orbit orbit ing a G star at with radius .Rthat is pc away. Our model star has the limb darkening prole that Knutson et al. measured for HD . Our model planets atmosphere has Nacontent and cloud deck height that are rou ghly consistent with the anal ysis of Charbonneau et al. metalicity that is sola r. Finally we present results at our simulations spectral resolution RS and we simulate transit events observed using two dierent lower resolution spectrographs one wit h spectral resolution R S and one with R S . All spectrographs and associated optical paths in ou r sim ulations have throughput eciency. In the remainder of this section we provide a detailed description of our parameterization of the proble m. .. Parameters of the Star The parameters related to the star are listed in Table . They are set to match measured parameters for HD and we use the limbdarkening pro le from Knutson et al. . We normalize the ux to that of a blackbody of temperature Tof the size and at the distance of HD. .. Parameters of the Planet The parameters related to the planet are in Table . We model t he planet as an inner component that is essentially a billiard ball completely o paque at all wavelengths and an outer component that is an isothermal atmosphere with scale heightHRgasTpg where Rgasis the gas constant is the molar mass and gis the acceleration of gravity. The Table . Model Transit Parameters Star Parameter Description Value M Star Mass . M .g R Star Radius . R .cm T Star Temperature K d Distance to star pc Stellar Rotation Period month density of our model planets atmosphere varies as exprRpH whereRp is the radius of the optically thick part some authors have c alled this radius the cloud deck Charbonneau et al. . This hypothetical cloud d eck could cause the planet to be optically thick at a higher altitude than would otherwise be expected as discussed in e.g. Richardson et al. and Sudarsky et al. . Th e cloud deck causes the optical depth as a function of radius in our model to have a singular di scontinuity at radius Rp. .. Spectral Parameters The parameters pertaining to the shape of the observed spect rum are in Table . In addition to the location of the planet within the stellar dis k the shape of the stellar spectrum and the wavelengthdependent opacity of the planets atmos phere together inuence the transmission spectrum. SpecShape is a parameter that can take on the values Flat Blackbody or Solar and determines the restframe spectrum of the model stellar photosphere. The integrated stellar spectrum is the convolution of the restframe spect rum with the stellar rotation prole. When Flat is chosen the restframe model stella r spectrum intensity is set to the mean value of the blackbody intensity in the specied wavele ngth range minmax which in our simulation is set to nm nm. When Solar is chosen the model stellar spectrum instensity is set to a highresolution solar spect rum that is normalized to the ux from HD but the Na D lines in this highresolution spectrum have bee n replaced by Gaussian ts to the solar lines. The planets atmosphere has Nabsabsorption features each of which is due to an element with a given fraction of the solar abundance. In the models pr esented in this paper Nabs we consider the Na doublet at . nm and . nm wit h sodium at fractional abundance fXNapXNa . of the solar abundance. Each line is modeled as a Voigt prole as described in e.g. Press Rybicki . .. Parameters of Observing and Computing The nal set of parameters listed in Table includes those that specify the observer and those that determine how the observation is discretized for the purpose of numerical computation. The model observational setup is determined b y three parameters the tele scopes diameter D m in our simulations and eciency and the spectrographs spectral resolution RSwe setRSto for the purpose of computing the model and Fromftpsolarch.tuc.noao.edu . Table . Model Transit Parameters Planet Parameter Description Value Mp Planet Mass .MJ .g RpOptically Thick Planet Radius .RJ .km P Planet Pressure at Rp. bars H Planet Atmosphere Scale Height km Tp Planet Atmosphere Temperature K fTL Frac. Tidal Locked Rot. Rate or veq or km s a SemiMajor Axis . AU H Number of Scale Heights in Atm. aParameter values are set to match measured values from the HD b system where possible. Table . Model Transit Parameters Spectral Features Parameter Description Value SpecShape Shape of Star Spectrum Flat Blackbody or Solar min Min. Wavelength in Sim. nm max Min. Wavelength in Sim. nm Nabs Abs. Features in P. Atm. f Frac. Solar Abund. First Line . First LineCenter . nm Aki Transition Prob. First Line .s gi Stat. Wt. Lower Level First Line gk Stat. Wt. Upper Level First Line f Frac. Solar Abund. Second Line . Second LineCenter . nm Aki Transition Prob. Second Line .s gi Stat. Wt. Lower Level Second Line gk Stat. Wt. Upper Level Second Line aIn parameters that have iandksubscripts iindicates the lower level sfor both lines andkindicates the upper level pfor the bluer line and pfor the redder line. The fractional solar abundance is set to . in order to achi eve modest agreement with data observed for the Na D doublet in HDbs atmosphere. we rebin to lower more easily achieved resolutions and after computing a model. These three parameters prescribe the sizes of the s pectral bins and the rate at which those bins are capable of collecting light. In order to compute the ux at Earth as a function of wavelengt h we begin by dividing the stellar disk into nbconcentric annuli and we divide each annulus into nazimuthal sections. In each section the redshifted spectrum and the n ormalization must both be computed. Knowing the stellar rotation rate and axis we may calculate the recessional velocity of any point on the stars surface as a function of its locatio n on the projected stellar disk and we redshift the spectrum from each part of the star accord ingly. When the planet is intransit we separate the stellar disk into an annulus tha t contains the planet and the rest of the disk that we treat as described above. The annulus that contains the planet is treated almost as above divided into nbAsubannuli each of which has nAazimuthal sections but the subannuli are incomplete interrupted by the plan et. In order to sample the planets atmosphere we divide the reg ion that overlaps the star intonbpconcentric annuli around the planets center each of which is divided into np azimuthal sections. In each section we must determine the o ptical depth and multiply by exp . In calculating the optical depth we note that in the case t hat the planets rotation axis is entirely normal to the lineofsight if the planet r otates as a solid body then the radial component of its recessional velocity is constant al ong a ray bp Nbpbracketleftbigg vpbppcbracketrightbigg where the column density is calculated in terms of a function Gthat is specied below Nbp nGbpRpH. In equation vpbpp is the recessional velocity of the planet as a function of radius and azimuth which depends upon the or bit and the rotation. Note that there is a single vpalong a given lineofsight dened by a bpp pair only under the assumption of solid body rotation. The restframe crossse ction is computed according to the Voigt prole. The function Gis dened as the following integral GbpRpH braceleftBiggintegraltext expbracketleftBig blRp HbracketrightBig dl b pR p bpRp. . Model Transit Spectra As described in . we seek the expected signaltonoise ratio for disting uishing between the spectrum that would be observed due to a nonrota ting planet or one that is is in a Cassini state with its rotation axis nearly in the plane o f orbit and the spectrum that would be observed due to a tidally locked planet. The compute d model spectrum N is the time integral of the instantaneous spectrum N and consists of the number of photons detected per wavelength bin NNtobs for some small exposure time tobs. The model signal of rotation per bin that we are looking for is the dierence between the rotating model spectrum Nrotand the nonrotating model spectrum Nno rot SbparenleftBig NrotNno rotparenrightBig tobs. We make the optimistic approximation that the noise per bin i s just the photonnoise NbradicalBig Nno rottobs. The total signaltonoise ratio in a single exposure then is the sum in quadrature of SbNb for all wavelength bins i SNradicaltpradicalvertexradicalvertexradicalvertexradicalbtbinssummationdisplay i NrotiNno rotiradicalBig Nno roti radicalbig tobs. A similar summation in quadrature applies over all exposure s. Note that in principle the expression in equation is insensitive to the sizes o f bins and hence to the spectral resolutionRS as long as the bins are small relative to the Gaussian width o f the absorption feature under consideration. Our simulations indicate tha t the spectral resolution must be in order for SN to be nearly independent of RS. The eect of rotation both during ingress and during midtr ansit is illustrated in Figure . For illustrative purposes in this gure we assume a uniform star at spectrum nonrotating no limbdarkening. On the left panels of Fig ure we show a snapshot during ingress at .thcontact and on the right we show a snapshot during the midd le of a transit .thcontact. The quantity plotted is RR from B where Rt Nin transit t Nout of transit t The bottom panels of Figure show the dierence spectra betw een the models with a tidally locked planet and the models with a nonrotating planet Rrot R no rot. As described in above a planets rotation causes the centroids of stellar absorption features to shift relative to a nonrotating planet. In Figu re centroid shifts in velocity units are plotted as a function of position in transit for a planet transiting in front of a realistic star model with a Sunlike spectrum. The recessio nal velocity increases roughly . . . . ...x Wavelength nm R IngressRotating Planet NonRotating Planet . . . . .x Wavelength nm R Difference. . ........ Wavelength nm R MidTransitRotating Planet NonRotating Planet . . .x Wavelength nm R Difference Fig. . Upper panels show snapshot spectra for one of the th e Na D lines for two dierent model planets tidally locked and nonrotating lower pan els show the dierence between the two model spectra.The quantities plotted are RR upper panels and R lower panels where Rt Nin transit tNout of transit t. In the upper panels the blue curve is the tidally locked planets transit spectrum and the green curve is the non rotating planets transit spectrum. In the lower panels th e dierence between the rotating and nonrotating planets spectra. Left Halfway through ingress at .thcontact. Right Halfway through the whole transit .thcontact. sinusoidally during ingress reaching a peak of about cm sat .thcontact. During midtransit between ndand rdcontacts the net velocity shift is much smaller. Egress is nearly perfectly symmetrical with ingress though the velo city shifts have the opposite sign. The cumulative and incremental signaltonoise ratio acro ss the transit are shown in the top and bottom panels respectively of Figure . As a planet proceeds in its transit from rst contact to fourth contact the SN builds up steadily throug hout the transit as can be seen in the top panel of this gure. This cumulative increase reect s the steady incremental SN per second of observation which for a planet crossing in front of a uniform star is shown in the bottom panel. The three curves in the bottom panel represent in decreasing order of SN the incremental SN curves that are expected for a spectrogr aph with ultrahighresolution . . . . . . . . . ...... Fraction from First Contact to Fourth Contact v of Centroid msv During Transit Realistic Star Model Fig. . Centroidshift of Na D lines from tidally locked rot ation from the beginning to the end of a transit relative to an identical but nonrota ting planet Sunlike stellar spectrum. The vertical lines denote .thand .thcontact cyan and second and third contact magenta. Between rst and second contact the spe ctrum with the rotating planet is redshifted relative to the nonrotating planet by up to ab out cm s between third and fourth contact it is blueshifted by the same amount. Thi s plot samples the transit at regularlyspaced points. Parameters were chosen to repr esent the HD system. the simulations resolution RS for a spectrograph with as highresolution as bHROS on Gemini R S and for a spectrograph with more standard high resolution R S . In the top panel we show the cumulative SN assuming t he simulations resolution for a planet in front of a uniform s tar and for a planet in front of a more realistic sunlike star that rotates once per month ha s a limbdarkening prole and has a solar spectrum. It is apparent in the top panel of Figure that a spectrograph with our simulations resolution would see the eect of rotation at SN .in a single transit in the case of the simplied uniform star and at SN .in one transit of the realistic star. The eect of including in the simulation the realistic features of stellar rotation limb darkening and a solar spectrum is therefore to depress the S N of the eect of tidally locked rotation by a factor of slightly more than . The bottom panel of the gure indicates that our predicted SN for one transit of a realistic star . might be adjusted downward by depending on the spectral resolution indicating a tot al onetransit SN for the case of the realistic star of about .. Finally we do not show the incremental SN for the realistic star model but as the top panel of the gure in dicates a larger proportion of the total signal comes from ingress and egress in the realist ic star model than in the uniform star model. . Discussion TheSNscales with the square root of the number of absorption lines under consider ation with the square root of the number of transits and wit h several other parameters as follows SN parenleftBiggradicalbigg Nabs parenrightBiggparenleftBigradicalbig transitsparenrightBigparenleftbiggD mparenrightbigg .VVparenleftbiggR RparenrightbiggparenleftbiggRpH RpHparenrightbiggparenleftBigv m sparenrightBig R SSN In this equation Nabsis the number of absorption lines Dis the telescopes diameter is the eciency of the instrumental setup Vis the stars magnitude Vis HDs magnitude about . Ris the stellar radius Ris HDs radius RpandHare the planets radius and scale height and RpandHare HDbs radius and scale height. R S is a function that characterizes the nonlinear response o f SN to the spectral resolution of the spectrograph for instance . and.. Finally SN . for a uniform star and XNapXNa . and SN . for a more realistic rotating limbdarkened star with a solar spectrum. Culling the signal from midtransit however is much more d icult than from ingress and egress because the shape of the distortion depends more sensitively on the structure of the planet. For the realistic star our model predicts SN.with the m telescope with Poissondominated photon noise for ingress alone an d therefore a factor greater orSN.for ingress and egress. In Table we present the number of orbits that must be observ ed in order to make a detection of rotation for various combinations of paramet ers. In all cases we assume a realistically achievable optical setup with spectral res olutionR S and throughput . Improvement in R Swill yield a modest improvement in SN and improvement incould be quite signicant. In the third column of Table A we present the total available SN for the whole transit according to our model while in the fourth column B we present the available SN from just ingress and egress. Th e fth and sixth columns are based on the SN in the fourth column. Finally as a sanity check our model can be tested by compari ng it to the analysis of Charbonneau et al. . That analysis suggests that the s odium content of a planets atmosphere can be determined by comparing the ux in a narrow band centered on the Table . Model Transit Parameters Observation and Computi ng Parameter Description Value D Telescope Diameter . m m Spectroscope Eciency . R S Obs. Spec. Resolution Tint Integration Time . s RS Comp. Spec. Resolution t TimeStep in Integration s nb of Star Annuli n of Star Azimuthal Sections nbA of S. Annuli in P. Annulus nA of S. Azim. Sec.s in P. Ann. nbp of Planet Atm. Annuli np of Planet Atm. Azim. Sections aParameter values are set to match measured values from the HD b system where possible. Table . Required Number of Transits For Detection SpecShape D SNTr. A SNTr. B Req. Transits A Duration A Flat uniform star m . . months Solar m . . . years Solar m . . months Solar m . . weeks aA table showing the number of orbits required to achieve a SN detection of tidally locked rotation of HDb assuming a planetary Nacont ent that is solar. As sumptions we are monitoring two spectral lines the Na doub let with a spectrograph with resolving power R S and an eciency in the optical setup of .. The third col umn SNTr. A is the SN per transit as shown in Figure and the fourth column is the SN per transit considering only ingress and egress. The A in the fth and sixth columns indicates that the numbers of transits and the requi red duration are tabulated for SN values from column three. . . . .Cumulative SN Cumulative SN Across Transit Uniform Star Realistic Star . . . . ... Fraction from First Contact to Fourth ContactSN Per Second Incremental SN s Across TransitRspec simulation resolution Rspec Rspec Fig. . Top SN for distinguishing between a rotating and a nonrotati ng planet accu mulated during a single transit. Upper curve displays the cu mulative SN for the distinction of a tidally locked planet from a nonrotating model assumi ng a completely uniform star the model star has a at spectrum is not rotating and there i s no limbdarkening. Lower curve displays the same but for a more realistic star the mo del star rotates once per month has the limbdarkening prole determined by Knutson et al. and has a solar spec trum. These curves assume the spectral resolution used in th e simulation RS for more easily achievable spectral resolution these curv es are adjusted downward by as displayed in the bottom panel. The vertical lines de note .thand .thcontact cyan and second and third contact magenta. Also both to p and bottom panels show model results assuming throughput eciency . In practice these curves would be adjusted downward by a factor or. . for an ultrahigh reso lution spectrograph. Bottom Incremental SN for sixty second observations across th e transit assuming a uniform nonrotating star with a at sp ectrum. Top curve shows the incremental SN assuming a spectrograph with the spectral resolution of the simulation RS . Middle and bottom curves show the same assuming spect ral resolutions R S andR S respectively. Parameters of the system except for the stellar spectrum in the bottom panel were chosen to represe nt the HD system. sodium resonance lines with the ux in a wider band surroundi ng but excluding the lines. In that paper the decrement in the narrow band containing th e sodium features is named nNa and was measured to be .for HD during the middle of transit. They presented several models all of which overpredicted the s odium decrement. The model that predicted the smallest magnitude of the decrement had solar metalicity and cloud deck at . bar this model predicts nNa .in midtransit. Our model solar metalicity cloud deck at . bar predicts .in midtransit as shown in Figure . We conclude that our model is in reasonable agreeme nt with both Charbonneau et al.s model and with the actual data . . . . . . . . . . .....x Fraction from First Contact to Fourth ContactnNaSodium Decrement Fig. . The ux decrement due to sodium in the planets atmos phere as shown by the quantitynNadened by Charbonneau et al. . This decrement reaches a maximum in magnitude of . halfway through transit in our model. . Conclusion Our investigation indicates that with currently availabl e instruments it will be dicult to obtain the sensitivity needed to achieve a minimal SN detection of tidally locked rotation of the planet HDb. Nevertheless it appears that the eect of rotation will have signicant though small inuence on transitspectr a taken with current or nearfuture instruments. Because this inuence is so small it is worth c onsidering ways that the SN could be improved according to the scalings summarized in e quation . The most obvious way to boost SN is to increase the collectin g area of the telescope the eect of which is shown in Table . With an extremely large mclass tele scope the required discrimination power could be achieved in transits if our optimistic assumptions about the noise are not too far o. As the abundances of other elements or molecules in the plane ts atmosphere are iden tied the number of absorption lines Nabsthat can be utilized can increase. Observing four absorption features instead of two will boost the SNper orbit by and will therefore cut in half the required observing time to achieve a xed target SN. The HD system is only . pc away Bouchy et al. b but the star is smaller and dimmer than HD and has the same apparent m agnitude. We nd that overall it has no relative advantage in terms of SN. It may be unlikely that a star signicantly brighter than HD will be found to h ave a transiting giant planet companion but if this should happen the signature of rotation will be more readily apparent in the system with the brighter star. Finally since SN is proportional to the size of the atmosph ere represented by atmin equation a planet with a more extended atmosphere would show the distortion due to rotation more readily. The size of the atmosphere depends on the product of Rpand the height of the atmosphere atmH so the SN could be increased in the case of a larger planet a hotter one or one with lower surface gravi ty. Unfortunately although some other planets might be slightly larger HDb is pr obably just about as hot and puy as can be hoped for. Although the optical transit spectrum of an extrasolar gian t planet contains many pre cious clues regarding the nature of rotation and climate or w eather we emphasize that we have so far addressed only the forward problem deep high sp ectral resolution transit spec trawillbe distorted by HDbs tidally locked rotation if ind eed it is tidally locked. But seeing the eect of rotation in a spectrum and knowing that we are seeing the eect of rotation are two very dierent things. The inverse problem identifying the rotation rate will be much more challenging and is beyond the scope of thi s papers investigation. In brief it is impossible to decode the clues that the spectrum holds without a Rosetta stone namely without already possessing accurate knowledge of abundances in the planets at mosphere. We note that when it comes to solving the inverse pr oblem it may be possible to make do without a perfect Rosetta stone by comparing the star s spectrum at two dierent times of transit instead of comparing it to an accurate input model. Specically comparing the ingress spectrum to the egress spectrum should eliminat e various systematic uncertain ties that may eect both ingress and egress spectra. This str ategy involves foregoing spectra between second and third contacts at a cost of a factor of inSN but has the ad vantage of being more robust with respect to errors in modeli ng the planetary atmosphere. Furthermore if detailed analysis along the lines of Charbo nneau et al. should reveal many more planetary absorption features a large currentg eneration telescope could detect the motion of an extrasolar planets atmosphere in of order a month. A nal point to keep in mind is that the technique presented in this paper is not limited to discerning the dierence between a tidally locked planet and a nonrotating planet this technique can be used to investigate the applicability of an y model of the motion of a transiting planets atmosphere. Some atmospheric circula tion models of Hot Jupiters predict extremely fast winds up to km s or more then four times the predicted equatorial rotation rate. It might therefore turn out to be easier to det ect winds than to detect rotation. Moreover if an analysis similar to the one described here we re to nd a deviation from the hypothesis of tidally locked rotation this would mean that something interesting is going on the planet could be rotating roughly as a solid body but at a d ierent rate there could be signicant nonrotational motion in the atmosphere or the re could be some combination of these phenomena. We thank Caleb Scharf Frits Paerels and Greg Bryan for extr emely helpful discussions. We gratefully acknowledge George Rybicki for use of a Voigt p role routine. 