 Fundamental physical systems may be governed by a WheelerD eWittlike equation rather than a Schr odinger equation. For such systems the conventional probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics cannot be directly applied and the formulation o f a consistent probabilistic interpretation is a controversial problem on which there is no consensus yet . The complexity of this conceptual problem is increased by specic technical diculties related to the presence of continuousspectrum operators innitenorm states gaugegroups having innite volume and the like. These technical diculties can often be resolv ed by appropriate techniques such as generalized states Gelfand triples group integration a nd similar. But the technical diculties are often muddled with the core conceptual problem of making sen se of generalrelativistic quantum mechanics creating a confusing situation. In this paper w e introduce a simple discrete model where all interesting operators are bounded and have discrete spe ctrum so that many of these technical diculties do not appear. The model provides a tool for discu ssing the probabilistic interpretation of generallycovariant quantum systems without getting e ntangled in the confusion generated by spurious innities and similar complications. We use the model for illustrating the generalrelativistic formulation of quantum mechanics devel oped in and in particular the prescription for computi ng multipleevent probability given in the companion paper . In we have argued that multieve nt probability can be always reconducted to singleevent probability provided that the dynamics an d the quantum nature of physical measuring Unit e mixte de recherche UMR du CNRS et des Universit ees de Provence AixMarseille I de la Mediterran ee AixMarseille II et du Sud ToulonVar laboratoire al i e a la FRUMAM FR . apparatuses are taken into account. Here we use the discrete model for illustrating and testing this general technique for computing multipleevent probabili ties. We begin by introducing the model in the simpler context in wh ich there is unitary evolution in time Sec. . We discuss its generalrelativistic formula tion in Sec. . The probabilistic interpretation is discussed in in Sec. . The interesting timeless case w here there is no unitary timeevolution is discussed in Sec. . The modication to the formalism requir ed in the continuum case will be discussed elsewhere . As pointed out in the formalism that we obtain shows an i ntriguing convergence with the HartleHalliwells history formulation of quantum mechan ics . This formulation of quantum theory has been largely motivated by the need of understanding the p robabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics in the timeless context and the problems has be en discussed in depth see and references therein. The conceptual dierence between the t wo approaches has been discussed in detail in . The model Consider a particle in a nite region of twodimensional spa cetime. For simplicity assume that space and time are both periodic and the region has the topology of a torus. We shall later take the time period to innity. Discretize this region by means of a latti ce formed by NNxNtpoints. Denote the lattice points as s xt wherex ...Nxandt ...Nt. For convenience we take x respectively t periodic modulo Nxrespectively Nt that is we identify xNxwithx andtNt witht. We write the spacetime quantum mechanical wave function o f the system in the form xt where we insist xandtare here discrete integer variables. To begin with assume the dynamics is given by a unitary evolu tion int. We drop this assumption below in Sec. . Thus assume for the moment that there is a unit aryNxNxmatrix Uand the wave functionsxt that are consistent with the dynamics of the theory are thos e satisfying xt Uxt Nxsummationdisplay yUxyyt. This is a discrete version of the Schr odinger equation we c an intuitively view the relation with a continuous theory as given by U eiH whereHis the conventional nonrelativistic hamiltonian andis the lattice spacing in the time direction we put planckoverpi throughout this work. In other words Uis unitarystep timeevolution operator that is the the o perator that advance the state by one lattice step in the time direction. The full timeevolut ion operator is given by Ut Ut. Its matrix elements Wxtxt Uxxtt form the discrete analog of the propagator of the Schr oding er equation. We assume that UNt in order to respect the periodicity a condition that disapp ears in the Nt limit in which we are interested. In nonrelativistic quantum mechanics Uxxtt is interpreted as the probability amplitude of nding the system at the point xat timetif we have found the system at the point x at timet. One may also consider a variant of the model in which Uxyis nonvanishing only if xy k where say k . This is typically the case when Uxyis obtained from the discretization of a Schr odinger equation and derivative operators are discr etized by rstneighborhood dierences. We call this version microlocal since it propagates at ni te speed on the lattice. Recall however that the nonrelativistic Schr odinger equation propagate s at innite speed. This microlocality is in general inconsistent with the unitarity of U. General relativistic formalism We now illustrate the generalrelativistic formulation of the model introduced above. The kinematical state space Kis the linear space formed by all complex functions xt whether or not they satisfy eq. . More precisely we dene Kas the Hilbert space KCNxNtspanned by the orthonormal basissanbracketrihtxtanbracketriht. We write xt anbracketletxtanbracketrihts anbracketletsanbracketriht. The physical state space His the linear subspace of Kformed by the states that satisfy the dynamics namely by the functionsxt that satisfy . Since these states are uniquely determine d by their value on any xed time slice tconstant we have that H CNx. Notice that because of the simplicity of our model His a proper subspace of K this is not true in general see chapter of . Let us give a more covariant looking form to . For this purp ose let us introduce an NN matrix TrecallNis the total number of lattice points whose only nonvanish ing matrix elements are Txtxtt tUxx. Notice that Tis unitary and TNt here is the unity operator over K. Then we can write the dynamical law in the covariant for m T that is Nsummationdisplay sTsss s. This is the discrete analog of the continuous WheelerDeWit t equation see . In other words we can intuitively view the relation with the continuous theor y as given by T eiHeiptH whereHis the relativistic hamiltonian or hamiltonian const raint andis a small parametertime step. The generalized projector Pthat denes the relativistic formalism is dened by Psummationdisplay nTn where because of the periodicity TnNtTn in we sum only over n ...Nt. The denition can be seen as the discrete version of the expression Pintegraldisplay d eiptH which denes the generalized projector in the continuous ca se see eq. . of and eq. of . This expression is also related to the group averaging tec hnique see . It is easy to check that PisNttimes the projector operator PK H . In fact if is inH namely satises we have immediately PNt. On the other hand since Tis unitary it is diagonalizable and its eigenvalues have the form ei. The physical Hilbert space His given by the eigenspace associate with the eigenvalue Because of the periodicity Nt Ifor some integerI. Acting on the corresponding eigenstate Psummationdisplay nTnsummationdisplay neinsummationdisplay neinIN t neationslash QED. It is important to notice that while the projector Pis illdened in the Nt limit the generalized projector Premains well dened. It is for this reason that Premains meaningful also when Hfails to be a proper subspace of K. A straightforward calculation shows also that anbracketletxtPxtanbracketriht Uttxx UttxxUxxtt that is the matrix elements of Pare the matrix elements of the evolution operator or what is the same the propagator cf. eq. . Notice that we can write anbracketletxtPxtanbracketriht Uttxxsummationdisplay x...xttUxxUxxUxttxsummationdisplay xtxtU where the sum is over all the histories sequences of latti ce pointsxtxt....xt that start at the point xt increase monotonically in time by one time unit at every st ep and end at the point xt. This expression illustrates the connection with the sum overhistory formalism see and references therein. It is important to observe that we can equivalently write anbracketletsPsanbracketrihtsummationdisplay sss...s nTssTssTsnssummationdisplay ssU where now the sum can be extended over allpossible histories. In fact because of the form of the matrix T the only histories that have nonvanishing amplitude are th e ones that increase monotonically in time by one time unit at every step. Using this language th e fact that the histories summed over increase monotonically in tis not an intrinsic property of the formalism but only a prop erty of the matrix Tss. This is the property that we will drop in Sec. . This history language becomes particularly transparent in the microlocal case in which the trans fer matrix Uis directly given by a nonunitary discretization of the S chr odinger equation. Say for instance that H mpVx then approximating the derivative with nite dierence s we write the Schr odinger equation in the form xt x t xt xxt ifaandare the spatial and temporal the latticespaces iplanckoverpi maandx i planckoverpiparenleftbigplanckoverpim aVxparenrightbig . Then the only nonvanishing matrix elements of the Tmatrix are Txtxtt tparenleftbig x xx x xx xparenrightbig . That is Thas nonvanishing elements only for histories that are con tinuous on the lattice namely formed by sequences of adjacent or diagonal lattice sites . Let us now come to an important point. For the moment we have i ntroduced Has a linear space without saying anything about its Hilbertspace str ucture namely about its scalar product. As a proper subspace of K the space Hinherits a scalar product from K. However it is far more convenient to dene a dierent scalar product in H dened as the scalar product in Kdivided byNt. That is if H we dene anbracketletanbracketrihtH NtanbracketletanbracketrihtK. This denition follows easily from the general denition of the scalar product of a physical space eq. . and following lines in and eq. in anbracketletssanbracketrihtH anbracketletPsPsanbracketrihtH anbracketletsPsanbracketrihtK. Thus we promote Hto an Hilbert space by dening its scalar product by . The advantage of this of course is that in the limit Nt the scalar product anbracketlet anbracketrihtHremains well dened. In other words this Hilbert structure is well dened even when His not a proper subspace of K. Notice that it follows from this denition that xtanbracketrihtis a normalized vector in Kand also Pxtanbracketrihtis a normalized vector in H. From now on we take Nt . We interpret this limit as describing the innite time evol ution not the continuous limit of the lattice spacing. Probabilistic interpretation According to the basic postulate of relativistic quantum me chanics states in Krepresent possible observations. In particular the state xtanbracketriht K represents the event xt in spacetime say the particle is detected by an apparatus at the spacetime point xt. Then see eqs. .. in or eq. in the probability amplitude for observ ing the event xt if the event xt was detected is given by AxtxtanbracketletxtPxtanbracketriht. By equations and this is the conventional amplitud e of standard quantum mechanics that is the propagator. The interest of this formulation on the other hand is that it remains meaningful and well dened when the dynamics is not unitary in time. The above denition of probability amplitude is sucient to dene the probability of single events described by individual states in K. The problem left open in and addressed in was to de ne the probability for multiple events or for a subspace of Kwith dimension larger than . This cannot be avoided in particular when dealing with operators with continuous spectrum because physical apparatuses have always nite resolution and therefore in g eneral cannot detect individual events. Let us therefore move to multipleevent probabilities. A case that does not raise diculties is to dene the probabil ity that the particle be detected at xt OR yt wherexneationslashy but notice the tof the two events is the same. In this case the two events are orthogonal in H because anbracketletytPxtanbracketriht Uyxyx. We are therefore in the simple case i of Sec. III of whe re following we postulate that probabilities add. This is of course nothing but the standar d assumptions in nonrelativistic quantum mechanics demanding that the probability of being at any one of two dierent points at the same timeis the sum of the two probabilities of being at the individual points. Let us move on to the more interesting case. What is the probability that the particle be detected at yt OR yt where say t t For simplicity let us focus instead on the probability fo r the particle to be detected in yt AND yt the two are easily related see eq. in . Now we hav e anbracketletytPytanbracketrihtUyytt which in general does not vanish. This is case ii of Sec. III of . According to this probability can be given a physical meaning onlyby explicitly coupling the system to an apparatus that inter acts with the system at time tat the point y namely at the spacetime point s yt. Let us therefore do so. We model the apparatus in the simplest possible form. Introd uce a twostate system Aanbracketrihtwith AYesNo and couple it to our system. The kinematical state of the com bined system is Kext CNxNtC spanned by the orthonormal basis anbracketrihtxtA anbracketrihtsAanbracketriht. We dene the dynamics by replacing the operator Twith the operator TsTxtdened by TsTsAsATssA As sTssIAAA A. The rst term is the free evolution of the system and the free trivial evolution of the apparatus. The second term is the interaction. It is dierent from zero o nly at the spacetime point s xt that is the apparatus ips if and only if the particle pass t hroughxxat timett. Here the evolution of the apparatus is given instead than the trivia l evolution operator A A by the matrix IAAparenleftbigg parenrightbigg which ips the state of the apparatus. We call PsPxtthe generalized propagator dened by this coupling namely by inserting the operator Txtdened in into . That is anbracketletsPssanbracketrihtsummationdisplay ss...snTsssTsssTssnssummationdisplay ssUs. It is easy to see that this implies anbracketletxtAPxtxtA anbracketrihtUxxttAA iftandtare both smaller or larger than tthe interaction time or if ttt and anbracketletxtAPxtxtA anbracketrihtsummationdisplay xUxxttparenleftBig AAx xIAAAAparenrightBig Uxxtt iftt t. Notice that this interaction is designed for the apparatus to ip state if and only if the particle is at xat timet. Using this can be rewritten in a more covariant lookin g form anbracketletxtAPxtxtA anbracketrihtsummationdisplay xtxtUparenleftBig AA xtIAAAAparenrightBig where xt if the history goes through xtand xt otherwise. The multiple probability amplitude is then given by accord ing to Sec. IV.C of AxtxtxtanbracketletxtYesPxtxtNo anbracketriht. A straightforward computation gives the probability eq. of PxtxtxtAxtxtxtUxxttUxxtt. The reader can check with a tedious but straightforward calc ulation using standard quantum me chanics and the wave function collapse algorithm that this is the correct probability for this sequence of measurements namely for detecting the particle at xat timetandatxat timetif the particle was initially at xat timetassumingtt t. The coupling to an apparatus can be easily generalized to an a rbitrary number of apparatuses. For instance say we have apparatuses at the spacetime poin tss...sKcoupled as follows TsA ...A KsA...A KTssA A AK A Ksummationdisplay kKs skTssA A Ak A kIA kAkAk A kAk A kAK A K. Then the probability to observe the system at the spacetime point xt in conjunction with all apparatuses having detected the particle at all the events ss...sK if the system was observed at the spacetime point xt in conjunction with all apparatuses being in the Nostate is Pxtxt...xKtKxtanbracketletxtYes...Yesbracehtipupleftbracehtipdownrightbracehtipdownleft bracehtipupright KPs...sKxtNo...Nobracehtipupleftbracehtipdownrightbracehtipdownleftbracehtipupright Kanbracketriht The possibility of taking the continuum limit of this expres sion will be discussed in . Again the reader can check that this is the correct probability for a se quence of measurements where the wave function is repeatedly collapsed at each measurement. What we have done so far indeed is nothing more than a reform ulation of the standard proba bilistic interpretation of quantum theory including the p robabilities computed by using the collapse postulate. What is interesting is that thisformulation can be readily generalized to the case where there is no unitary evolution and therefore no evident time ordering in the system. In fact the reader should notice that the expression does not depend explicitly on the timeordering of the mea surements. Timeordering is implicitly implemented by the dynamics of the coupled system which is coded into the form of T. In other words if sis earlier in time than s then the probability becomes automatically the one given by rst projecting on sand then on s. This is particularly transparent in the history language the histories summed o ver are only the ones correctly ordered in timebecause the dynamical operator Tselects only these histories. In this sense in this formalism the time ordering of the measurements is absorbed into the deni tion of the dynamics. It is this fact that allows us to generalize the formalism to a genuinely timele ss situation namely a situation in which the dynamics is not given by unitary evolution in t. This is what we do in the following section. Extension to the timeless case We now consider the extension of the discrete model to the cas e where there is nounitary evolution in time. We take the same kinematics as the discrete dynamics ab ove but a dierent dynamics. That is we take again a lattice with lattice points s xt but now there will not be a unitary evolution in t. The kinematical Hilbert space is always spanned by the orth onormal basis sanbracketrihtxtanbracketriht and we still dene the quantum dynamics by the discrete WheelerDeWitt e quation and by the generalized projector . The novelty is that now we do not assume Tto have the form . This form in fact is the discrete analog of HptH which denes the nonrelativistic special case of general ized quantum mechanics. A particularly interesting case is given when Tis still microlocal that is has nonvanishing matrix elements Tssonly for lattice points s xt ands xt that dier at most by klattice steps namely for xx kandtt k for instance with k . This property can follow from instance from a discretization of a continuous relativisti c hamiltonian Hthat has nite degree in the derivatives. We assume for simplicity that the system is periodic and the re is an integer Zsuch that TZ . This does not need to be a periodicity in one of the coordinate s of the extended conguration space. The example that follows for instance has a periodic dynam ics. Then the generalized projector is dened by Psummationdisplay nZTn. Otherwise we have to take the limit P limZ Zsummationtext nZTn. All expressions of the previous section continue to hold. In particular we can still use the coupling to the apparatus system and dene probabilities amplitudes by . This shows that multiple probabilities can be dened in general also in a system without unitary time evolution. The physical interpretation of these probabilities is disc ussed in detail in the companion paper and will not be repeated here. We only recall here the importa nt fact that in the general case the probability of detecting the event sisnotinterpreted as the number of times the system is detected insinstead of being detected in other positions at equal time . Rather it is interpreted as the number of times the system is detected in sinstead of not being detected . For instance the number of time a detector at swill click divided the total number of runs of the experimen t. The two denitions are equivalent in the nonrelativistic case because in this ca se if a particle is not at x then the particle must be in another one and only one other position of the equ al time surface in the timeless case the rst denition becomes meaningless but the second rema in meaningful. As a concrete example consider a discretized version of the nite dimensional model studied in . In the continuum this model is dened by a twodimensi onal extended conguration space with coordinates aandb and by the relativistic hamiltonian H parenleftbig p ap babparenrightbig E whereEis an integer constant. We refer to for all details and mo tivations. The motions are closed lines in the extended congurations space in fact e llipses and therefore this model does not admit a conventional hamiltonian formulation because the motion of a hamiltonian system are always monotonic in tand therefore cannot be closed lines. The dynamics of the mo del is determined by the dynamics of two harmonic oscillators with m with xed total energy EaEbE. The dierence is that here the time variable is assumed to be unob servable. In fact the two commuting operatorsHa parenleftbig p aaparenrightbig andHb parenleftbig p bbparenrightbig are diagonalized by the states nanbab anbracketletabnanbanbracketrihtHnaaHnbb wherenanb ...andHnx are the harmonic oscillator eigenstates. Of course abanbracketrihtsummationdisplay nasummationdisplay nbHnaaHnbbnanbanbracketriht. The relativistic hamiltonian gives Hnanbanbracketriht EaEbEnanbanbracketriht nanb Enanbanbracketriht. and denes the physical space via H . In order for solutions to exist Emust be integer and the physical Hilbert space His spanned by the Estates nEnanbracketriht n ...E . Here His a proper subspace of K. The generalized projector is precisely the projector P integraldisplay d eiHEsummationdisplay nnEnanbracketrihtanbracketletnEn. Its matrix elements are anbracketletabPabanbracketrihtEsummationdisplay nHnaHEnbHnaHEnb. For more details see . Let us discretize this model in order to avoid probability d ensities and distributions. This can be done as follows. Choose an integer NE. Cutdown the kinematical phase space to the space spanned by the states where nanbanbracketriht nanb ...N . We write N M for later convenience. Introduce the discretized position states by analogy with as abanbracketrihtNsummationdisplay naNsummationdisplay nbHnaaHnbbnanbanbracketriht whereabMM......MM andis a suitably chosen small real number. Notice that aandbare here discrete variables. The resulting discrete model can be taken as a dis crete approximation of the model studied in . We want the lattice spacing to satisfy in order to be much smaller than the harmonic oscillator vac uum state widthp planckoverpim otherwise the vacuum state lattice approximation would be very rough. In the present casep planckoverpim since we have chosen units where planckoverpim . We also want the lattice spacing to be much smaller than the minimum allowed wavelength the wavelength is the l ength on which the state varies in order for the state to be well approximated by a state on the lattice the lattice spacing must be much smaller. Since the maximum momentum allowed by the constraint is pmax E this implies that planckoverpi pmax that is E. Finally we choose Msuch that the nite size region covered by the lattice is mu ch larger than the maximum amplitude that is this region should be large enough to accommodate any state. This implies M E therefore NE. Under these conditions there are all reasons to believe that the q uantum dynamics of the discrete model approximates well the continuum one. The projector can then be written in the discrete form PEsummationdisplay nnEnanbracketrihtanbracketletnEn NNsummationdisplay eiH N. whereHnanbanbracketriht nanb Enanbanbracketriht. Remember that Nis the total number of kinematical states. Equivalently P NNsummationdisplay T where TeiHN is the matrix giving the onestep parametertime evolution in the discretized model. Its matrix elements are TababanbracketletabT abanbracketrihtNsummationdisplay naNsummationdisplay nbHnaaHnbbeinanbENHnaaHnbb. Using this matrix the matrix elements of the projectors can be written as a sum over histories as in where now s ab and we sum over all histories long at most Nsteps. We are now ready to couple the system to an apparatus and calcu late multipleevent probabilities. Lets say we have an apparatus that detects the system at the p oint ab. Then we modify Tas follows TababTababAabATababA Aab abTababparenleftBig IA AA Aparenrightbig . This gives the projector PabNsummationdisplay Tab and the probability amplitude of nding the system at the poi nt ab of the extended conguration space with the detector having detected the system in the po int ab if the system was detected at the point ab with the detector in the Noanbracketrihtstate is AabababanbracketletabYesPababNo anbracketriht This is a welldened multipleevent probability in a syste m without unitary time evolution. This shows that the prescription of can be implemented at le ast in principle also in a system without unitary time evolution. We close with a conjecture. It should be interesting to consi der the semiclassical limit of these probabilities. In semiclassical coherent states cor responding to classical trajectories ellipses were constructed. Consider a semiclassical kinematical wa ve packet peaked around the point ab and with velocity papb. This state is projected by Ponto a a semiclassical state peaked along the corresponding ellipses. In it was shown that the kinem atical state space splits into clockwise and anticlockwise moving states. Let C abandA abbe two such states belonging to the clockwise and anticlockwise subspace respectively both generating a s emiclassical motion along a given ellipses but in opposite directions. Let ab ab and ab be three points along these ellipses. Consider the two transition amplitudes AC abababanbracketletabYesPabC abNoanbracketriht. and AA abababanbracketletabYesPabA abNoanbracketriht. One may expect that in the classical limit the rst of these am plitudes is suppressed if abab ab is ordered anticlockwise and the second is suppressed if ababab is ordered clockwise. Conclusion Using a simple discrete model we have shown in detail how mul tievent probabilities can be com puted in a timeless quantum system governed by a Wheeler DeWittlike equation instead than a Schr odinger equation. We have computed these probabiliti es using the strategy introduced in namely the observation that multievent probabilities can be interpreted as probabilities for a single event if the event includes the presence of a record of a fe ature of the system measured by an apparatus that has interacted with the system itself. In words to say that i a particle has been detected at xtandat xt can be interpreted as meaning that we detect a state in which ii the particle is detected at xt and there is a record that the particle has interacted with a nother system at xt. This interpretation is conceptually satisfying since how else could we combine events happening at dierent times if not by having records The key dierence b etween i and ii is of course that in conventional quantum mechanics the property of being at xt and the property of being at xt are represented by quantum operators that do not commute. Wh ile the property of being detected at xt and the existence of a record that the particle has interact ed with another system at xt are expressed by operators that commute hence there is a sin gle state where both properties are sharp. Notice that nothing in the construction presented here assu res us that the probabilities computed are independent from the dynamics of the apparatus and its co upling. In fact in general the opposite may very well be the case especially in more complicated sit uations or in the continuous case. This is not a defect of the formalism. To the contrary it is an indi cation from the theory that physically dierent apparatuses may give dierent results see an d references therein. In other words the philosophy here is not that an abstract apparatusindepend ent probability has to be well dened. Rather in any concrete physical situation where a given ap paratus is present the formalism should be capable of providing the probabilities of the observable outcomes. Acknowledgments This work has been partially completed thanks to the nancia l support provided by the Programme Alan European Union Programme of High Level scholarGr ants for Latin America grant No. EDMX and by the Programme SFERECONACYT France Mexico grant No.. 