 Many geophysical ows are subject to the effects of planetary rotation and to forcing and dissipation on large scales. Statistically steady states of such ows can exhibit regions of strong mixing that are clearly separated from regions of weak or no mixing implying that the mixing is nonergodic in the sense that ow states are not phasespace lling on phase space surfaces of constant inviscid invariants such as energy and enstrophy Shepherd . As a consequence concepts from equilibrium statistical mechanics which rely on ergodicity assumptions and can account for the statistics of twodimensional ows in the absence of largescale forcing and dissipation e.g. Miller Robert and Sommeria Turkington et al. Majda and Wang generally cannot be used in developing statistical closures for such ows. In this paper we investigate the statistics of what may be the simplest ow subject to rotation and largescale forcing and dissipation that exhibits mixing and nomixing regions in statisti cally steady states barotropic ow on a rotating sphere driven by linear relaxation toward an unstable zonal jet. Depending on a single control parameter the relaxation time this prototype ow exhibits behavior in the mixing region near the jet center that ranges from criticallayer waves at short relaxation times to turbulence at sufciently long relaxation times. This permits systematic tests of nonequilibrium statistical closures in ow regimes ranging from weakly to strongly nonlinear. We study a nonequilibrium statistical closure based on a secondorder cumulant expansion CE of the equaltime statistics of the ow. The CE is closed by constraining the third and higher cumulants to vanish and the resulting secondorder cumulant equations are solved nu merically. The CE is weakly nonlinear in that nonlinear eddyeddy interactions are assumed to vanish. We show that for short relaxation times the CE accurately reproduces equaltime statis tics obtained by direct numerical simulation DNS. For long relaxation times the CE does not quantitatively reproduce the DNS statistics but still provides information for example on the location of the boundary between the mixing and the nomixing region. Section introduces the equations of motion for the ow and discusses their symmetries and conservation laws. Section describes the DNS including the accumulation of loworder equaltime statistics during the course of the simulation. The CE and its underling closure approximation are outlined in section . Section compares DNS and CE. Implications of the results are discussed in section . . Barotropic jet on a rotating sphere a. Equations of motion We study forceddissipative barotropic ow on a sphere of radius arotating with angular velocity . Though not crucial here we prefer to work on the sphere and not in the plane approximation as the sphere can support interesting phenomena not found on the plane e.g. Cho and Polvani . The absolute vorticity qis given by qf r f whereis the relative vorticity is the stream function ris the Laplacian on the sphere and f sin is the Coriolis parameter which varies with latitude . The time evolution of the absolute vorticity is governed by the equation of motion EOM q tJ q qjetq where J q acos q q is the Jacobian on the sphere and is longitude. Forcing and dissipation are represented by the term on the righthandside of Eq. which linearly relaxes the absolute vorticity qto the absolute vorticity qjetof a zonal jet on a relaxation time . The zonal jet is symmetric about the equator and is characterized by constant relative vor ticitieson the anks far away from the apex and by a rounding width of the apex qjet f tanh In the limiting zerowidth case of a point jet jetqjetf sgn and the jet velocity has zonal and meridional components ujet atanjj vjet For the zonal velocity attains its most negative value aat the equator. For the gradient of the absolute vorticity changes sign at the equator so the jet satises the RayleighKuo necessary condition for inviscid barotropic instability. Lindzen et al. showed that the linear stability problem for the barotropic point jet on a plane is homomorphic to the Charney problem for baroclinic instability which motivated extensive study of the pointjet instability and its nonlinear equilibration e.g. Schoeberl and Lindzen Nielsen and Schoeberl Schoeberl and Nielsen Shepherd . Here we focus on the statistically steady states of the ow and study their dependence on the relaxation time. b. Symmetries and conservation laws Because the jet to which the ow relaxes is symmetric about the equator steadystate statis tics of the ow are hemispherically symmetric. Deviations from hemispheric symmetry can be used to gauge the degree of convergence towards statistically steady states. They will also highlight a qualitative problem with the statistics calculated by the CE see section below. The EOM Eq. is invariant under a rotation of the azimuth and under a spatial inversion qq qjetqjet Furthermore the vorticities change sign under a northsouth reection about the equator q q qjet qjet These symmetries are reected in the statistics discussed below. As a consequence of the constancy of the relaxation time statistically steady states satisfy two constraints that can be obtained by integrating the EOM over the domain. Kelvins circula tion and Kelvins impulse of longtime averages hiin a statistically steady state are both equal to those of the jet to which the ow relaxes Z hqrtidrZ qjetdr Z hqrtisindrZ qjetsindr where ris a position vector. Conservation of circulation is trivially satised on the sphere because vorticity integrals vanish at each moment in time Z qrtdrZ rtdrZ qjetrtdr However conservation of impulse which is equivalent to conservation of the angular mo mentum about the rotation axis is not trivial and must be respected by statistical closures. . Direct numerical simulation a. Parameters and implementation All vorticities and their statistics can be expressed in units of but to give a sense of scale we set the rotation period to day. We use Arakawas energy and enstrophy conserving discretization scheme for the Jacobian on a MNgrid. For all results reported below there are M zonal points and N meridional points. The lattice points are evenly spaced in latitude and longitude apart from two polar caps that eliminate the coordinate singularities at the poles. Each cap subtends . radians in angular radius. At initial time t we setqqjetplus a small perturbation that breaks the azimuthal symmetry and triggers the instability. The time integration is then carried out with a standard secondorder leapfrog algorithm using a time step of t s . The accuracy of the numerical calculation was checked in the absence of the jet against exact analytic solutions that are available for special initial conditions Gates and Riegel . The jet parameters are xed to be and radians . Though unphysically fast for Earth the jet illustrates the strengths and shortcomings of the CE. Code implementing the numerical calculation is written in the ObjectiveC programming language as its object orientation and dynamic typing are well suited for carrying out a comparison between DNS and the CE. The absolute vorticity during the evolution of the instability and in the statistically steady state eventually reached in a typical DNS are shown in Fig. . Figure displays snapshots of the absolute vorticity in the steadystate regime for six different choices of . In the limit of vanishingly short relaxation time and strong coupling to the underlying jet the xed jet dominates and qqjetwith no uctuation in the ow. For instabilities develop and irreversible mixing begins to occur in criticallayer waves which form Kelvin cats eyes that are advected zonally with the local mean zonal ow e.g. Stewartson Maslowe . At sufciently large relaxation times days the jet becomes turbulent and as increases further turbulence increasingly homogenizes the absolute vorticity in a mixing region in the center of the jet. The dynamics are strongly out of equilibrium and nonlinear for intermediate values of yet continue to be statistically steady at long times. In the limit of long relaxation time and weak coupling to the underlying jet and upon addition of some small viscosity to the EOM the system reaches an equilibrium conguration at long times Salmon Turk ington et al. Weichman Majda and Wang and again the uctuations vanish. Here we restrict attention to the geophysically most relevant case of short and intermediate jet relaxation times. Part of what makes this ow an interesting prototype problem to test statistical closures is that except in the extreme limits of vanishing or innite relaxation time irreversible mixing is conned to the center of the jet and does not cover the domain. An estimate of the extent of the mixing region can be obtained by considering the state that would result by mixing absolute vorticity in the center of the jet such that it is in the mean homogenized there and continuous with the unmodied absolute vorticity of the underlying jet at the boundaries of the mixing region. Because of the symmetry of the jet this state would have mean absolute vorticity hqi forjjc qjetforjjc and the boundaries of the mixing region would be at the latitudes at which qjet which are with our parameter values c cf. Schoeberl and Lindzen Shepherd . The meridional gradient of the resulting mean absolute vorticity does not change sign so the corresponding ow would be stable according to the RayleighKuo criterion. It represents a zonal jet that is parabolic near the equator. However while the mean absolute vorticity satises the circulation constraint not only in the domain integral but integrated over the mixing region betweenc it does not satisfy the impulse constraint . To satisfy the impulse constraint the mixing region in a statistically steady state extends beyond the latitudes c as can be seen in Fig. and will be discussed further below. Statistical closures must account for the structure of the transition between the mixing and nomixing regions in this ow which many simple closures such as those based on diffusion of absolute vorticity are not be able to do. b. Loworder equaltime statistics The rst cumulant or rst moment cof the relative vorticity depends only on latitude reecting the azimuthal symmetry of the EOM cr hric The calculation of the time averages hicommences once the jet has reached a statistically steady state. As the adjustment of the mean ow is controlled by the relaxation time reaching a statistically steady state takes longer for larger . Statistics are then accumulated every minutes for a minimum of days of model time until adequate convergence is obtained. We have veried that the longtime averages thus obtained are independent of the particular choice of initial condition see for instance Fig. . As expected azimuthal symmetry is recovered in such long timeaverages as can be seen for instance in the nal panel of Fig. . In addition the rst cumulant changes sign under reections about the equator c c a consequence of the reection symmetry . The second cumulant of the relative vorticity given in terms of its rst and second moments by crr hrriChrrihrihri depends on the latitude of both points randr but only on the difference in the longitudes crr c It is essential to take advantage of the azimuthal symmetry of the second cumulant Eq. to reduce the amount of memory required to store the second cumulants by a factor of M from MNtoMNscalars. In the DNS the reduction is realized by averaging the second cumulant overfor each value of . The averaging also improves the accuracy of the statistic. By denition the second cumulant is symmetric under an interchange of coordinates crr crr. It also possesses the discrete inversion symmetry c c a consequence of the inversion symmetry . . Secondorder cumulant expansion A systematic expansion in equaltime cumulants of the relative vorticity can be formulated using the Hopf functional approach Frisch Ma and Marston . The EOMs for the rst and second cumulants may be written most conveniently by introducing the following auxiliary statistical quantities pr h ri prr h rriC These quantities contain no new information as crpandcrp where it is un derstood that unprimed differential operators such as randJact only on the unprimed coordinates r. The EOMs for the rst and second cumulants may then be written as cr tJcr f pr Z Jrr prrdrjetcr and crr tJcr f prr Jcrr prcrr rr where rris shorthand notation for terms that maintain the symmetry crr crr. Closure is achieved by constraining the third and higher cumulants to be zero chrrriC etc Otherwise an additional term would appear in Eq. that couples the second and third cumu lants. In the terminology of meanows and eddies where an eddy quantity is any uctuation about the corresponding meanow quantity the closure approximation c amounts to dis carding eddyeddy interactions e.g. Herring Schoeberl and Lindzen . The EOM for the rst cumulant could alternatively have been obtained by taking the mean of the vorticity equation and the EOM for the second cumulant could have been obtained by forming a secondmoment equation from the linearized equation for the eddy vorticity. The EOMs for the two cumulants are integrated numerically using the same algorithms and methods as those employed for DNS starting from the initial conditions cr jetrand crr crrcwith small positive c. The cumulants evolve toward the xed point cr tcrr t As a practical matter we consider that the xed point has been reached when the cumulants do not change signicantly with further time evolution. It is essential for the second cumulant to have an initial nonzero value as otherwise it would be zero for all time corresponding to axisymmetric ow which is unstable with respect to nonaxisymmetric perturbations. The programming task is simplied by implementing the CE as a subclass of the DNS class inheriting all of the lattice DNS methods without modication. The azimuthal symmetry of the statistics Eqs. and and the discrete symmetries Eqs. and are exploited to reduce the amount of memory required to store candp. The symmetries also speed up the calculation and help thwart the development of numerical instabilities. The time step t is permitted to adapt increasing as the xed point is reached. Various consistency checks are performed during the course of the time integration. For instance we check that crr c at all lattice points r. Furthermore from Eq. it must be the case that Z crdrZ crrdr Likewise as the secondorder cumulant expansion conserves Kelvins impulse it follows from the impulse constraint that Z cr sindrZ qjet sindr and Z crr sindr Finally the local mean kinetic energy must be nonnegative hEriprrprqr Its areaintegrated value obtained by CE compares well to that determined by DNS. . Comparison between DNS and CE The equaltime statistics accumulated in the DNS can be directly compared to the results of the CE because both calculations are based on the same jet model with the same nitedifference approximations on the same MNlattice. Thus any differences between the DNS and CE statistics may be ascribed solely to the closure approximation. Results similar to those below are obtained on a coarser lattice. Fig. is a plot of the rst cumulants calculated with the two approaches. Closest agreement between DNS and the CE is found at the shortest relaxation time of days. The CE is accurate for short relaxation times because uctuations are suppressed by the strong coupling to the xed jet the second cumulant is reduced in size and errors introduced by the closure approximation that neglects the third cumulant are small. For longer relaxation times the CE systematically attens out the mean absolute vorticity in the center of the jet too strongly. The largest absolute discrepancy in the mean vorticity appears at an intermediate relaxation time of days. At longer relaxation times the mean absolute vorticities in the DNS and CE become small in the central jet region however their fractional discrepancy increases and the second cumulants show increasing quantitative and even qualitative discrepancies. Comparison of the second cumulants for days Fig. reveals a qualitative dis crepancy. The twopoint correlations as calculated in the CE exhibit wavenumberthree period icity in disagreement with the wavenumberfour periodicity of the criticallayer wave dominat ing the uctuating ow component cf. Fig . In this regard the CE mimics the wavenumber three periodicity found in DNS at the longer relaxation time of days. In both DNS and CE the correlations are strongest in both a positive and negative sense when one of the two points of the second cumulant is located near the equator. Interestingly the second cumulant from the DNS exhibits a nearexact symmetry that is not a symmetry of the EOM cc in addition to the model symmetries of Eqs. and . This approximate symmetry which holds exactly for the secondorder CE may be attributed in the case of the DNS calculation to the small size of the third cumulant. The xed point of the secondorder CE as described by Eqs. and possesses the articial symmetry for under the northsouth reection the Jacobian operator changes sign as do both candp and the xed point equations remain unchanged provided that the second cumulant obeys Eq. . The articial symmetry would however be broken in general by any coupling of the second cumulant to a third nonzero cumulant or equivalently by the inclusion of eddyeddy interactions which can redistribute eddy enstrophy spatially. Thus the articial symmetry is an artifact of the closure which as noted above is a good approximation only for short relaxation times. Other qualitative discrepancies appear at longer relaxation times Fig. . For days the second cumulant calculated by DNS no longer shows the articial symmetry whereas the symmetry continues to be present in the CE due to the closure approximation. In contrast to the days case here the largest twopoint correlations occur when one of the two points is away from the equator reecting the fact that correlations are washed out by the strong turbulence near the jet center. Finally the second cumulant as calculated by CE shows a wavenumberthree periodicity with excessively strong correlations at large separations as a result of the neglect of eddyeddy interactions which strongly distort the wave eld in the DNS. Nonetheless even for relatively long relaxation times for which differences between the CE and the DNS at the center of the jets are apparent the CE does capture the structure of the transition from the mixing region in the center of the jet to the nonmixing region away from the center where the mean absolute vorticity in the DNS and the absolute vorticity of the underlying jet coincide. . Discussion and conclusions The barotropic ows considered here attain statistically steady states after sufcient time has passed. They are out of equilibrium on large scales as the underlying xed zonal jet is both a source and a sink of energy. Statistical approaches that have been developed to describe the equilibrium states of geophysical ows in the absence of largescale forcing and dissipation therefore are not applicable here. For example approaches based on maximizing an entropy functional subject to constraints on energy enstrophy and possibly higherorder inviscid invari ants Miller Robert and Sommeria Salmon Turkington et al. Weichman Majda and Wang assume ergodic mixing and therefore would give statistical equi librium states with mixing throughout the domain rather than mixing conned to the region in the center of the jet. Instead we have implemented an expansion in equaltime cumulants and made the simplest nontrivial closure approximation of dropping the third and higher cumu lants. For short relaxation times the expansion reproduces the rst moment fairly accurately. For longer relaxation times it is quantitatively less accurate but it still captures the transition from a mixing region at the center of the jet to a nomixing region away from the center. The steadystate statistics from the CE can be found with much less computational effort than that required to calculate timeaveraged statistics using DNS as the partial differential equations governing the xed point are timeindependent. This is especially true if a good initial guess is available for the cumulants candcas the xed point can then be reached rapidly by iteration. Furthermore as the statistics vary much more slowly in space than any given realization of the underlying dynamics see Fig. it may be possible to employ coarser grids without sacricing accuracy. Thus the CE realizes a program envisioned by Lorenz long ago by solving directly for the statistics but it does so at the cost of a closure approximation that compromises the accuracy of the statistics especially for ows with more strongly nonlinear eddyeddy interactions. There is evidence however that eddyeddy interactions in Earths atmospheric macroturbulence are only weakly nonlinear Schneider and Walker so a secondorder CE may be worth exploring for more realistic models. Whether more sophisticated closures can be devised that are more accurate and yet only require comparable computational effort remains an open question. In the case of isotropic turbulence renormalizationgroup inspired closures show some promise McComb but these typically make extensive use of translational invariance in actual calculations. Investi gation of more sophisticated approximations for systems that lack full translational invariance such as the barotropic ows we considered may be warranted in view of the partial success of the simple cumulant expansion reported here. Acknowledgments. We thank Greg Holloway Paul Kushner Ookie Ma and Peter Weichman for helpful discussions. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants DMR and DMR. It was initiated during the Summer Aspen Center for Physics workshop Novel Approaches to Climate and J. B. M. and T. S. thank the Center for its support. 