 . Reminder on N gauged supergravities in D . Gauge algebras and the embedding tensor . Lagrangian formulation . Gauging the N axionic symmetries . Electricmagnetic duality and electric gaugings . Nonunimodular gaugings . Lagrangian description . Higherdimensional origin . Heterotic reduction with duality twist . Contact with N gauged supergravity . Conclusions and open problems . Introduction The eective eld theories describing the lowenergy dynamics of typical string and M theory compactications are plagued with massless scalar elds that hamper any attempt to contact fourdimensional phenomenology. One way of eliminating some of these unwanted massless scalars is the introduction of uxes in the internal compactication space see for a review. From the eective eld theory perspective turning on uxes corresponds to a gauging of the original theory obtained without uxes. The term gauging refers to the fact that a subgroup of the global duality symmetry of the original theory is promoted to a local gauge symmetry. Alternatively part of the original Abelian gauge symmetry can be promoted to a nonAbelian one and all the elds including the scalars acquire minimal couplings to the gauge elds. The connection with the moduli stabilization issue stems from the fact that for extended supergravity theories the only way to generate a potential is through the gauging. The resulting theories are known as gauged supergravities see for a concise review. One can envisage a bottomup approach to the problem of moduli stabilization where instead of looking for a specic higherdimensional background whose corresponding low energy eective theory is phenomenologically viable one rst constructs a gauged super gravity theory with the required phenomenological properties and then attempts to engi neer it from higher dimensions. Such a programme was initiated in and models were proposed there exhibiting full moduli stabilization. Evidently such a programme depends crucially on having a good picture of the land scape of possible gauged supergravity theories. Therefore a problem of paramount impor tance is to classify and describe all possible gaugings of supergravity in diverse spacetime dimensions and with various amounts of supersymmetry. This problem was tackled in a series of publications where the general method of embedding tensors was developed. Ultimately however one would like to know that the eective theory constructed in the bottomup approach is consistent i.e. can be embedded in a certain string or M theory setup. Although for many classes of gauged supergravities their higherdimensional realization is known for the generic gauged supergravity there is no recipe not even guaranteed existence of a higherdimensional origin. Presumably such an endeavor would require a better understanding of the classes of string backgrounds dubbed nongeometric whose signicance has recently been investigated in the framework of ux compactications and supergravity theories. Here our aim is to contribute in this direction by analyzing a family of fourdimensional N gauged supergravities and explain how they can be obtained from string theory or higherdimensional supergravity theories. Gauged supergravity with N supersymme try was the arena of since string theories with supercharges are the starting point of a variety of realistic string constructions. Recently the most general theory of this type was explicitly constructed in using the formalism of embedding tensors. We will use this formalism to study in detail the specic class of N theories obtained by gauging the axionic symmetries namely the axionic shifts and rescalings . Consistency requires that severalSO directions are also gauged. The general structure of the gauge algebra is systematically worked and it exhibits the following characteristic property it is non at contrary to what happens in more conventional gaugings. In order to uncover the higherdimensional origin of these gaugings one needs to per form a ScherkSchwarz reduction of heterotic supergravity or of the common sector in general on a torus. The crucial ingredient here is a twist by a noncompact duality sym metry of tendimensional supergravity. The identication of the theory obtained from the reduction with the gauged supergrav ity under consideration is not at all straightforward. It relies heavily on a duality between massive vectors and massive twoforms in four dimensions. This duality is a necessary extension of the more standard duality between a massless twoform and an axion scalar eld in four dimensions it incorporates the St uckelberglike terms that are generated by the axionic gauging. The organization of this paper is as follows. Section is devoted to a reminder of gauged N supergravity in D . We emphasize the approach of the embedding tensor following Refs. . In Sec. we specialize to the socalled electric gaugings and we analyze a particular class of algebras for which we elaborate on the corresponding gauged supergravity. These theories admit two equivalent formulations related by a duality between massive vectors and massive twoforms in four dimensions. In Sec. we move on to higher dimensions. Our aim is to analyze the tendimensional origin of the fourdimensional theory constructed in Sec. . We show that it can be obtained using a generalized ScherkSchwarz reduction of heterotic N D supergravity. Furthermore we comment on the higherdimensional origin of other classes of N gaugings. In Sec. we present our conclusions and discuss some open problems. . Reminder on N gauged supergravities in D In this section we review N gauged supergravity following Ref. . After some general remarks on the possible gauge algebras and the constraints on the gauging parameters we present for reference the most general bosonic Lagrangian. . Gauge algebras and the embedding tensor Fourdimensional N supergravity has a very restricted structure. It contains gener ically the gravity multiplet and nvector multiplets. The bosonic sector of the theory consists of the graviton n vectors and nscalars. In the ungauged version the gauge group is Abelian Un and there is no potential for the scalars. Interactions are induced upon elimination of the auxiliary elds. They aect the scalars whose nonlinearities are captured by a universal coset manifold MSLR USOn SOSOn . All elds are nonminimally coupled to the Abelian vectors. The gauge kinetic terms have scalarelddependent coecients whereas the action is at most quadratic in the gauge eld strengths with no explicit dependence on the gauge potentials. For this reason the SLRSOnSpnR symmetry of the scalar manifold is globally realized as a Uduality symmetry. Although the scalar manifold survives any deformation of the plain theory triggered by gaugings the Uduality is broken as a consequence of the introduction of nonAbelian eld strengths and minimal couplings all of which depend explicitly on the gauge potentials. The duality group acts as a symmetry of the eld equations and the Bianchi identities of the gauge elds. In the standard formulation of supergravity only a subgroup of it is realized oshell as a genuine symmetry of the Lagrangian. This includes the SOn plus a twodimensional nonsemisimple subalgebra of SLR generated by axionic shifts and axionic rescalings. The third transformation in SLR corresponding to the truly electricmagnetic duality is an onshell symmetry which relates dierent Lagrangians as sociated to dierent choices of symplectic frames. The only known deformation of N supergravity compatible with supersymmetry is the gauging . This consists in transmuting part of the Unlocal symmetry into an nonAbelian gauge symmetry or equivalently in promoting part of the global Uduality symmetry to a local symmetry using some of the available vectors. This operation should not alter the total number of propagating degrees of freedom as required e.g. by super symmetry. It is possible to parameterize all gaugings of N supergravity by using the socalled embedding tensor . The latter describes how the gauge algebra is realized in terms of the Uduality generators. It captures all possible situations including those where some of the gauge elds are the magnetic duals of the vectors originally present in the Lagrangian as well as the option of gauging the duality rotation between electric and magnetic vectors which as already stressed appears only as an onshell symmetry. In this procedure one doubles the number of vector degrees of freedom keeping however unchanged the number of propagating ones thanks to appropriate auxiliary elds. One therefore avoids any choice of symplectic frame until a specic gauging is performed. We will not elaborate on these general properties but summarize the structure of the embedding tensor that we will use in the ensuing. We refer the reader to for further information on this subject. Then electric vector elds AM M nbelong to the fundamental vector representation of SOn. Their magnetic duals AMform also a vector of SOn but carry opposite charge with respect to the SOSLR that generates the axionic rescalings. TheSLR algebra is generated by SS fg which obey the following commutation relations SS SS S S . with . In the vector representation S and they explicitly read SS S S SS . The axionaand the dilaton form a complex scalar aie which parameterizes theSLRU coset. We dene M Im jjRe Re . and we denote by Mits inverse. The action of g a b c d SLR . is linear on MMgMgTwhile it acts on as a M obius transformation abcd. Therefore Sgenerates the axionic shifts Sthe axionic rescalings whereas the electricmagnetic duality is generated by S. In this basis AM AM form a doublet of SLR with diagonal Sand correspondingly the rescaling charges are and. TheSOn is generated by TMNTNMMNf ngobeying TKLTJM LJTKMKMTLJKJTLMLMTKJ . Since with the present conventions for we can raise and lower indices unambiguously as follows AAandBB. This leads to AAandAA. In particular SSSSandSS. withLJbeing theSOn metric. In the fundamental representation the generators read TKLJ IKIJ LLIJ K. The nscalars coming from the nvector multiplets live on the SOnSO SOn coset and can be parameterized by a symmetric matrix Mof elements MMN. Introducing vielbeins V Vm MVa M withm anda n we can write MVVTand dene the fully antisymmetric tensor MMNPQRS mnpqrsVm MVn NVp PVq QVr RVs S . that appears in the scalar potential. We will denote by MMNthe inverse of MMN. The gauging ofN supergravity proceeds by selecting a subalgebra of SLR SOn generated by some linear combination of fSTKLg. The coecients of this combination are the components of the embedding tensor and are subject to various con straints discussed in detail in the aforementioned references. In summary this tensor belongs a priori to the Vec VecAdj ofSLRSOn. However there are linear constraints resulting from the requirement that the commutator provides an adjoint action and that supersymmetry is preserved. These reduce the representation content of the embedding tensor to VecAnt . Furthermore there are quadratic constraints guaranteeing the closure of the gauge algebra Jacobi identity. Putting ev erything together one nds that the admissible generators of the gauge algebra are of the form L fLMNTMNPQPTQL LS . wherefLMN are fully antisymmetric in LMN andLsatisfy iMNMN . These parameters characterize completely the gauging. The set of consistency conditions is completed as follows iiMNMfNIJ . iii IJMNMfNIJ . and ivMNfMI JfKL N JfKL I IfJKL MNMfNJKLI fJKLI . where and stand for antisymmetrization and symmetrization with respect to dierent indices belonging to the same family e.g. LN LNNL . IndicesMN are lowered and raised with LJandKMinverse matrix. This is actually the minimal set of constraints that one can consistently impose and they also guarantee that a Lagrangian exists propagating the correct number of degrees of freedom as one learns from general studies on gaugings of maximal supergravities . Several comments are in order here. A general gauging is manifestly expressed in terms of n nnnparameters subject to four conditions iiiiiiiv. The gauge algebra as dened by this set of parameters is characterized by the commutation relations of the subset of independent Ls. These generators are indeed constrained they satisfy e.g. LMLM as a consequence of their denition . and Eqs. . . . as they should since no more that nvectors can propagate. The structure constants of the gauge algebra are not directly read o from the fLMN s which are not necessarily structure constants of some algebra. They can however be expressed in terms of the fLMN s andMs and describe a variety of situations which capture simple semisimple or even nonsemisimple examples. For all of these MNalways provides an invariant metric although the CartanKilling metric of the corresponding gauge algebra can be degenerate. The duality phases of de Roo and Wagemans are also captured by the present formalism when the Ms are absent as relative orientations of fLMN with respect tofLMN for each simple component . We will not elaborate any longer on the general aspects of the embedding tensor and the variety of physical possibilities and for further details we will refer the reader to the already quoted literature. . Lagrangian formulation The bosonic Lagrangian corresponding to the most general N gauging was presented in . For the sake of completeness we reproduce this result here and provide several comments. The Lagrangian consists of a kinetic term a topological term and a potential for the scalars LLkinLtopLpot . The kinetic term reads eLkin R DMMNDMMN ImDD eMMNHM HN aMNHM HN . with the covariant derivatives dened as DMMNMMN gAP Q PMMNQ . DgAM Mg AM MAM M igAM M. and the generalized gaugeeld strengths being HM AM gfM NPAN AP g M NPCNP g M C M C . The combinations MNP and fMNP are dened in terms of the gauging parameters fMNP andNas MNP fMNPNPM . fMNP fMNPMPN NMP . For vanishing Ms Eq. . is the only constraint it is an ordinary Jacobi identity when . The tensor gauge elds CMN CMN andC C are auxiliary and their elim ination ensures that the correct number of gauge eld degrees of freedom are propagated. For that purpose one needs to introduce a topological term in the Lagrangian eLtopg MNPAM AN AP fMNP NMP AM AN AP g fMNRfR PQAM AN AP AQ g MNP M QRCNP CQR . MNPCNP MC MC AM gfM QRAQ AR Finally there is a potential for the scalar elds that takes the form eLpotg fMNPfQRSM MMQMNRMPS MQMMQ NRPS fMNPfQRSMMNPQRS M N MMMN . The basic feature of this Lagrangian is that it depends explicitly on both the electric gauge potentials AM and their magnetic duals AM . Therefore it allows the gauging of any subgroup of the full duality group SLRSOn where in principle both electric and magnetic potentials can participate. The eld equations derived from this Lagrangian and the gauge transformations can be found in . . Gauging the N axionic symmetries Here we present a class of N gauged supergravities obtained by making local the axionic shifts and axionic rescalings. This is a subclass of the electric gaugings and we will refer to them as nonunimodular gaugings . Their existence was pointed out in but here we analyze in detail and full generality the properties of the corresponding gauge algebra and discuss some interesting features of their Lagrangian description such as a duality between massive vectors and massive twoforms. . Electricmagnetic duality and electric gaugings The most general N gauging is described in terms of two tensors fLMN andI fgandILMNf ng satisfying four quadratic conditions i ii iii iv displayed in Eqs. ... This general formalism dened in an arbitrary sym plectic frame captures in particular the gauging of the electricmagnetic duality symmetry generated by Ssee Sec. .. Gaugings with pure fLMN s have been studied extensively in the literature. They correspond to switching on gauge algebras entirely embedded in SOn as shown by .. On the other hand turning on the Is allows one to gauge both SLR and SOn. This situation has not attracted much attention and only a few examples of the corresponding gauge algebras have been analyzed see e.g. . Our aim is to study systematically a class of such gaugings and show that they correspond to a specic pattern of higherdimensional reduction which generalizes the ScherkSchwarz mechanism. We will focus here on electric gaugings namely gaugings that do not involve the S generator of SLR. Axionic shifts Sor axionic rescalings Swill however be gauged accompanied by the appropriate SOn generators. Hence this class of gaugings is dened by setting I . We will also set fLMN . although this is not compulsory for electric gaugings while keeping II and fLMNfLMN . Furthermore we will focus on the case n which is related to pure gravity in ten dimensions and adopt the oblockdiagonal metric I I . The quadratic constraint iii Eq. . is now automatically satised while the constraints i ii iv Eqs. . . . reduce to MNMN MNMfNIJ . MNfMIJfKLN fIJKL . . Nonunimodular gaugings We will split the Iindices into ii with both iandiranging from to . This corresponds to the decomposition of the fundamental representation of SO into fundamental and contragradient of the diagonal SO subgroup. With this convention ijij whereasiiiiii. In this basis the SOinvariant inner product takes the form AMBMAmBmAmBmand we can write AmAmAmAm. A specic solution with fs ands. Now a nontrivial solution to Eqs. . and . is iii for all i . fiijfijifjiiijiall others vanishing . withiarbitrary real numbers. The existence of the gauging described in Eqs. . and . was pointed out in Ref. . Actually there exist a whole class of gaugings of this type with more components of the tensor fIJKturned on. As discussed in besides Eqs. . and . one can turn on fijk. Then the quadratic constraints reduce to a single equation fijkl . What is meant by electric gauging is not universally set in the literature. In for example electric gaugings are dened as those with IfLMN which is somewhat too restrictive. Since the novel feature of this class of gaugings is the presence of a nonzero parameter we will restrict ourselves to the simplest example namely the gauging with fijk . The gauging under consideration will be called nonunimodular for reasons that will become clear at the end of Sec. . or tracefull since fj ij i . This is slightly misleading however since the gauge algebra istraceless as a consequence of the full antisymmetry of its genuine structure constants. The latter are notfk ijbut specic combinations of fIJKandIread o from the commutation relations of generators .. The gauge algebra. In the rest of this section we will characterize the gauge algebra which will be further studied from a higherdimensional perspective in the next chapters. Using Eqs. . and . in expression . we obtain ii Si . i . ii Tj jS i . ijTj ii . The gauge algebra at hand has nonvanishing generators but only are independent i. Their commutation relations follow from Eqs. . and . ij . j . i i . . The setfigspans an Abelian sevendimensional Lie subalgebra. Furthermore the algebra generated by fgis a noncompact Asubalgebra of SLRSO. The above algebra is non at in contrast to the algebras obtained by standard Scherk Schwarz reductions. As we will see in later the gaugings at hand are related to twisted versions of these reductions which relax therefore the atness of the gauge algebras. In the particular case where ii the gauge algebra possesses nonvanishing generators. This algebra appears when compactifying from ve to four dimensions see with a non compact twist generated by the vedimensional rescaling. The full algebra .. will also emerge see Sec. as a tendimensional heterotic reduction with twist. Richer nonAbelian extensions are possible in this case that eventually lead to nonvanishing fijk as already advertised and which are not possible when compactifying from ve dimensions. These issues will be extensively analyzed in Sec. .. . Lagrangian description It is straightforward to derive the bosonic Lagrangian for the gaugings we have just de scribed by using the general formulas of the previous section. As a rst step we will implement . and . and later set . and .. Finally we will dualize a vector which acquires a St uckelberglike mass via the gauging at hand into a massive twoform eld potential. Electric gaugings IfKLM . The kinetic terms read eLkin R DMMNDMMN eDaDaDD eMMNHM HN aMNHM HN . where now DMMNMMN gAP Q PMMNQ. and HM AM gfM NPAN AP g MC . withCC . SincefMNP andMare zero and hence MNP and fMNP are zero as well we have omitted the index from all coecients. We will use the notation AM AM AM XM for the gauge potentials in order to avoid cluttering of the formulas with indices. Furthermore we dene the linear combinations XMXM AMAM . The gauge covariant derivatives of the axion and dilaton take the form DaaXAa . D A . By turning on the parameters we have gauged a nonAbelian twodimensional subgroup of theSLR global axiondilaton symmetry. The magnetic potential Xcorresponds to the gauging of the shift symmetry of the axion aacand acts as a St uckelberg eld whileAgauges the dilatation symmetry aea. In terms of the notation of the previous subsection the corresponding gauge algebra is the one spanned by and with commutation relation .. The topological term in the Lagrangian for the class of gaugings under consideration becomes eLtop MNPXM AN AP MCGM fMNRfR PQAM AN AP XQ . From now on we set the coupling constant gequal to for simplicity. We have dened the following gauge eld strenghts FM AM fM NPAN AP . GM XM fM QRAQ XR . in terms of which one can write HM FM MC. Finally the potential terms are eLpot M MNMMN fMNPfQRS MMQMNRMPS MQMMQ NRPS . withM e. Nonunimodular gaugings. We will now specify the gauge parameters by setting . and .. With this gauging the indices iandicorresponding to the andofSO SO are treated dierently. We rst notice that the magnetic eld strengths Gm do not appear in the Lagrangian. The gauge eld strengths that appear are Fm Am . Fm Am jAm Aj mAjAj . Gm Xm iAi Xm iAm Xi . where now XMXM mXm AMAM mAm . One further notices that the Lagrangian actually depends only on the linear combination mGm . This combination can be written in terms of AandXas G X AX . Similarly we introduce FmFm A. The natural prescription is to integrate out the auxiliary twoform Cin order to obtain the nal Lagrangian. If we do so starting from . . and . we obtain eL R DMMNDMMN eDaDaDD eMMNFM FN aMNFM FN eZZ XeLpot . In this expression ZaFG emMmNFN where FNis the Hodge Poincar e dual of FN we have also dened mMmnnand we have introduced the ChernSimons form An FnAnFn AAm Am AAm Am cyclic . The local gauge invariance under axionic shifts enables us to gauge away the axion a . Then the magnetic potential Xacquires a mass through its St uckelberg coupling to the axion. The nal expression for the gaugexed Lagrangian is therefore eL R DMMNDMMNDD eMMNFM FN e G emMmNFN G emMmNFN XeLpot . It captures all the relevant information carried by the axionicsymmetry gauging. St uckelberg mass and dualization. There is a dierent formulation of the theory which is actually more suggestive of a higherdimensional origin. Instead of integrating out the auxiliary antisymmetric tensor C one can promote Cto a propagating eld and integrate out X. Using as previously . . and . this procedure yields the following Lagrangian eL R DMMNDMMNDD eMMN FM MC FN NC e CAC eLpot . where the twoform Cacquires now a scalarelddependent mass. The key observation is that the theory described by . is related to that described by . by an interesting generalized duality. Recall that a massless twoform potential in four dimensions carries one propagating degree of freedom and can be dualized into a scalar. In the case where the twoform comes from the reduction of the tendimensional NSNS twoform in the gravity multiplet the dual scalar is the axion. If instead as it happens here the twoform is massive it carries three degrees of freedom and the dual potential is a massive vector. This duality is a particular instance of a generalized duality between massive pforms and massive Dpforms in Ddimensions . For the benet of the reader we will present schematically how this generalized duality works leaving as an exercise its precise implementation between . and .. Start from a massive gauge eld Xwith Lagrangian L gXX XX mXX . This Lagrangian can be obtained from L CXgCC mXX. by integrating C which is an auxiliary nonpropagating antisymmetric tensor. Instead we can integrate by partsLso thatXbecomes nondynamical while Cacquires a dynamics. Integrating out nally Xyields an action for a massive twoform L mCCgCC . which can be brought to a more familiar form for antisymmetric tensors by Hodge Poincar edualizing C. Following a similar pattern one can replace the massive vector XinLEq. . by a twoform. This yields precisely LEq. . therefore demonstrating that the LagrangiansLand Ldescribe equivalent physics. . Higherdimensional origin In this section we perform a generalized dimensional reduction of heterotic supergravity to four dimensions and show that the resulting eective theory belongs to the class of N gauged supergravities studied in the previous section. Recall that the usual dimensional reduction of heterotic supergravity which can be thought of as compactication on a sixtorus keeping only the massless modes results in a fourdimensional theory with supercharges Abelian gauge group Upand a global oshell symmetry SO p . Six of the Abelian vectors are graviphotons while another six of them come from reducing the NSNS twoform on the cycles of the torus. One can also reduce some of the vectors present already in ten dimensions and obtain p additional Abelian gauge elds. Usually this is done for the vectors lying in the Cartan torus of the tendimensional gauge group therefore yielding a theory with p . Since our goal here is to make contact with a gauged supergravity with p we will ignore this possibility and consider the reduction of the gravitymultiplet elds only. It is straightforward to extend the reduction to the YangMills sector and obtain generalizations of the gaugings we discussed so far. . Heterotic reduction with duality twist Our starting point is the bosonic action of heterotic supergravity in the string frame SZ MdxZ Kdyp Ge RGMNMN GMMGNNGKKHMNKHMNK . We assume a decomposition of the tendimensional spacetime in a fourdimensional non compact part Mparameterized by coordinates xand a sixdimensional internal manifold Kparameterized by yi. The spacetime indices will be decomposed as M i. As usual is the dilaton and H dBis the threeform eld strength of the NSNS antisymmetric tensorB. As said we neglect the tendimensional YangMills elds. The tendimensional spacetime indices MN of this section should not be confused with the funda mentalSO indices of the previous sections. TakingKto be a at sixtorus and keeping only the yindependent modes yields a theory with Abelian vectors and massless scalars two of which are the dilaton and the axion. The latter is the dual of the twoform Bobtained by reducing BMN. One way to obtain a more interesting theory is by introducing uxes in the torus. The most general reduction of this type where both NSNS and geometric uxes were present was studied in . The introduction of geometric uxes has an alternative interpretation as a reduction with a twist for the spacetime elds . This is actually a particular case of a generalized reduction scheme that usually is referred to as ScherkSchwarz reduction . The char acteristic property of reductions of this type is that the reduction ansatz can incorporate a dependance on the coordinates of the internal torus. This dependance is not arbitrary how ever on a technical level it is dictated by the requirement that the Lagrangian should be independent of the internal coordinates. This is implemented by selecting a prole for the elds whose consistency is guaranteed by some symmetry of the original theory. Such re ductions in the context of supergravity have been studied in while the reader is referred to for a general discussion on reductions with duality twists. A subtle point that is not usually emphasized is the following. These reduction schemes yield an eective theory for a nite set of modes selected out of the innitude of higher dimensional modes according to some symmetry principle. Hence it is not necessarily true that they encompass all lowenergy modes and further analysis is required in order to establish that the eective theory obtained through a ScherkSchwarz reduction is actually alowenergy eective theory. The symmetry we will employ in the present paper is the SO scaling symmetry of . under which the elds transform as GMNeGMNx BMNeBMNx . This enables us to trade the usual periodic ansatz which assumes no dependance on the torus coordinates with the following one xy x iyi GMNxy eiyiGMNx BMNxy eiyiBMNx. The parameters iare arbitrary real numbers that dictate the twisting of the elds along the six onecycles of the torus. The decomposition of the tendimensional metric tensor in terms of fourdimensional elds is the usual one GgAi Aj hij GiAj hij Gijhij . Heregis the metric on Mhijare the metric moduli of the sixtorus and Ai are the KaluzaKlein gauge elds. Similarly the antisymmetric tensor is decomposed as Bb Bibi Bijbij . We obtain a twoform b which usually is dualized to an axion six vectors Bi and scalar moduli bij. The above decompositions hold for the full tendimensional elds that are assumed to have a dependance on yiof the type dictated by the SO scaling symmetry. Consistency implies that gxy ekykgx bxy ekykbx hijxy ekykhijx. bijxy ekykbijx Ai xy Ai x bixy ekykbix . xy x kyk . where the fourdimensional dilaton is dened as log det h. Theyindependent modes on the righthand sides are the fourdimensional elds for which we would like to derive the eective action. The ansatz is consistent in the sense that the ydependance is totally eliminated from the action and the integration over yiyields an overall multiplicative factor. Notice that the volume of the internal sixtorus is encoded in the metric moduli hij. Let us rst reduce the EinsteinHilbert part of the action along with the dilaton kinetic term. The most ecient way of performing this reduction is the following. We start from the metric G MNxy yGMNx . where y exp yii use the relation between Ricci scalars for conformally related metrics and nally apply the usual reduction formulas for GMNx. After the above redenition of the dilaton necessary for absorbing the factor ofp h the conformal rescaling gexp g which brings us to the Einstein frame in four dimensions and a nal rescaling we obtain Sgravity Z Mdxpg R hijAk khij hijAhij g Ai i Aj j ehijFi Fj eihijj . whereFm Am Am and all elds are exclusively ydependent. There are several observations in order. First the metric moduli hijbecome charged under the KaluzaKlein gauge elds Ai . The charges are given by the vector of twisting coecients i. The dilaton is also coupled in a St uckelberg fashion to Ai . This signals the gauging of a shift symmetry as expected from a reduction where the ansatz was twisted by employing such a symmetry. Notice furthermore that the twisting does not result in a nonAbelian gauge symmetry for the KaluzaKlein gauge elds. It does however lead to a potential for the dilaton and the metric moduli. The reduction of the NSNS part of the Lagrangian is more easily performed using the tangentspace components of the antisymmetric threeform . Furthermore some eld Note that the dilaton is shifted under the SO scaling. redenitions are necessary in order to bring the resulting Lagrangian to a more standard form. One denes vector elds Ynand a twoformBas YnbnbnmAm . BbAm YmAm An bmn . We get SNSNSZ M hmnhkDbmDbnk e BkAk B BA B . ehmn YmmBbmF Y nnBbnkFk ei hijhkbmhmnbnkhikbkmhmnbnrhrj jpgdx where we have dened DbnbnYnnYmAm bn . YYY mnmn AmYnYnAm . while the ChernSimons threeform is YA A Y A Am Ym A Am Ym cyclic . We observe that the NSNS moduli are charged under the KaluzaKlein gauge elds but have also St uckelberg couplings to the NSNS gauge potentials. The latter couplings are due to the gauging of the shift symmetries of those moduli induced by the duality twist. A crucial dierence with the case of the ordinary dimensional reduction is that the four dimensional twoform Bacquires a mass. This prohibits the standard dual formulation in terms of an axion but according to the discussion of the previous section on dualities between massive elds suggests that a dual formulation in terms of a massive vector is possible. Let us nally stress that the reduction of the NSNS sector also contributes to the potential for the hijandbijmoduli last line of .. . Contact with N gauged supergravity We will now show that the eective theory described by the sum of actions . and . is nothing but the N gauged supergravity worked out in Sec. . Using the standard parameterization of the moduli matrix MMN MMN hmnhmkbkn bmkhknhmnbmkhkbn . theN potential . obtained for the nonunimodular gauging reads V ei hijhijhkbmhmnbnk hikbkmhmnbnrhrj j . This is precisely the potential in the eective theory . plus .. Notice that this identication claries the higherdimensional interpretation of the gauging parameters they correspond to the parameters used to twist the boundary conditions by SO scalings along the six onecycles of the torus. It is straightforward to check that the rest of the terms in . plus . match exactly those of . provided we identify the gauge elds Am Am in the gauged supergravity Lagrangian with the KaluzaKlein and NSNS gauge elds Am Ymin the heterotic reduction and the antisymmetric tensors as CB. This elucidates the higherdimensional origin of the gauged supergravity of Sec. and conrms the promi nent role of the generalized duality performed in four dimensions for reaching .. It is amusing that the fourdimensional twoform Bthat comes from the NSNS antisym metric tensor in ten dimensions is actually the auxiliary tensor gauge eld required for consistency of the gauging in the formalism of . Let us mention at this point that ordinary reductions of the heterotic theory with NSNS uxes and geometric uxes also yield N gauged supergravities . The correspondence with the embeddingtensor language is as follows there are no s turned on and the only nonvanishing parameters are the fIJKfIJK. Under the decomposition of indicesI ii the background NSNS uxes ijkand geometric uxes k ijare identied with the components of fIJKas fijkijk fijk k ij . all other components being zero. The remaining nontrivial quadratic constraint is iv Eq. . and it corresponds to the Bianchi identities for the NSNS uxes and the Jacobi identity for the geometric uxes. From this we conclude that the more general class of gaugings we mentioned in Sec. . with nonzero fijkoriginates from a tendimensional reduction with an SO duality twist combined with background NSNS uxes. The condition . found then is a consequence of the Bianchi identity resulting from the ansatz .. An interesting observation is in order here. The correspondence between the compo nentsfijkand the geometric uxes k ijprovides an alternative perspective on the gauging we have performed in Sec. . and the subsequent heterotic reduction of Sec. .. Indeed if we interpret the ydependance of the internal metric c.f. Eqs. . as inducing a geomet ric ux this ux is automatically nonunimodular since i ij . In ordinary reductions the unimodularity condition ensures consistency of the truncation of the higherdimensional Lagrangian . This wellknown obstruction is circumvented in our approach thanks to the compensating duality twist. We use the notation of . . Conclusions and open problems In this paper we studied in detail the class of N axionicsymmetry gaugings and established that they can be embedded in heterotic theory. More specically they arise through a reduction where the boundary conditions for the elds are twisted by an SO scaling symmetry. Similar reductions are possible for type II strings yielding N gauged supergravities or N upon appropriate orbifoldingorientifolding. For Mtheory instead there is no scaling symmetry of the action and that implies that the Lagrangian cannot be consistently truncated for elds with boundary conditions of this type. However one can still perform such reductions at the level of the equations of motion and it is expected that the reduced equations of motion correspond to gaugings of the type we studied here. In passing we also note that since the dilaton becomes a component of the internal geometry when a type IIA background is lifted to Mtheory reductions with dilaton twists should lift to Mtheory reductions with purely geometric twists of the type studied in . Some obvious extensions of the current work include twisted reductions of the heterotic theory taking into account the tendimensional gauge elds or similar type II reductions in the presence of branes and orientifolds. This should yield electric N gaugings where the gauge algebra is a subgroup of SLRSOn forn. The fact that the formulation of gauged supergravity through the embedding tensor is dualitycovariant implies that these theories capture the eective dynamics of backgrounds related by duality transformations. Recently it has become increasingly clear that the majority of these backgrounds are nongeometric and cannot be described using the familiar notions of geometry and ordinary uxes. From one point of view this demonstrates the power of the eective bottomup approach since fourdimensional physics can be derived without the need to delve into the microscopic details of a higherdimensional setup. On the other hand one could argue that a better understanding of nongeometric backgrounds may still be obtained through analyzing gauged supergravity. For instance the nongeometric uxes QandRproposed in as Tdual of the familiar NSNS and geometric uxes are automatically captured for heterotic compacti cations on a sixtorus by the formulation of N gauged supergravity we have being discussing. Using the notation of our gauging parameters fIJKdescribe all possible situations through fijkHijk f ijkfk ij f ijkQij k f ijkRijk . Besides this set of SOdual uxes the most general N gauging comprises of another set of Sdual uxes fIJK. It would be extremely interesting to understand the microscopic origin of all those nongeometric uxes directly in ten dimensions and derive the corresponding gauged supergravities using an appropriate reduction scheme see for some recent ideas in this direction. Also the nongeometric uxes can be interpreted as geometric uxes in an appropriate generalized geometry . Among others this should shed some light on the open problem of lifting gauged supergravities with nontrivial duality phases in heterotic string theory. A related question concerns the higherdimensional origin of the gauging constraints iiv. For example although some of these constraints have a clear origin as Bianchi identities in the internal space this is not so for the null condition i MM . The reduction we performed depends naturally on six parameters that ll up Min such a way that it is automatically null. It would be interesting to understand how N gaugings with more general parameters Mcan be obtained from higher dimensions and where the null condition comes from. We conclude by emphasizing that formulations of string and Mtheory of the type presented in as well as the mathematical framework of generalized complex geometry may provide the appropriate tools for resolving the above issues. Acknowledgments The authors wish to thank L. Carlevaro G. DallAgata S. Ferrara and H. Samtleben for stimulating scientic discussions and J. Sch on M. Trigiante and M. Weidner for very helpful correspondence. This work was supported in part by the EU under the contracts MEXT CT MRTNCT MRTNCT and by the Agence Na tionale pour la Recherche France. Marios Petropoulos acknowledges nancial support by the Swiss National Science Foundation. 