 Formic acid is one of the few moleculesin star formingregion s that is detected both in the solid state and in the gas phase s ee e.g. Schutteet al. Ikedaet al. . Infrared obs erva tionsoficesinhighmassYoungStellarObjectsYSOswitht he Infrared Space Observatory ISO contain absorption featu res that are assigned to HCOOH and that correspond to the C O stretchSCOat.mandtheOHandCHbendingmodes BOH andBCH at .m Schutteet al. . The SCO band is the strongest spectral feature of HCOOH ice but suers from partial overlap with the OH bending mode of solid H O at mBOH. TheBOHCH band at .m is signicantly weaker than the SCO band but is present in a relatively clean region and has previously been detected to ward high mass star forming regions Schutteet al. . More r e cently these features have also been observed toward low ma ss YSOs and possibly toward background stars Boogert et al. in prep. Knezet al. . Typical abundances of HCOOH vary between individual sources from to with respect to solid HO.Theaimofthispaperistostudythe SCOBOHCH and other infrared features of HCOOH ices in di erent astro physically relevant laboratory matrices and to compare the re sults with astronomical spectra to infer the chemical envir on mentofHCOOH ininterstellarices. Send oprint requests to S.E.Bisschop bisschopstrw.leidenuniv.nlInthe gasphaseHCOOHis detectedinenvelopessurround inghighandlowmassstarformingregionsaswellasinshock ed regions toward the galactic center vanDishoecketal. Ikedaet al. Bottinelli etal. RequenaTorres et al. Bisschopetal. . HCOOH is part of the surface chemistry network leading to the formation of complex organ ic molecules seen in hot cores TielensCharnley and is therefore expected to be present in compact hot regions wher e it has evaporated from dust grains. In contrast interferom etric observations show that gas phase HCOOH emission can be ex tended beyond the hot core and is not coincident with other oxygenbearing species such as CH OCHO Liuet al. Hollisetal. RemijanHollis . The observed ga s phase HCOOH has low rotation temperatures and its abun dance is a factor of lower than that of solid HCOOH Bisschopet al. . It is very likely that gaseous and so lid HCOOHcoexistinthesameregion.Alowlevelofnonthermal desorption due to e.g. cosmic ray spot heating is su cient to explaintheobservedgasphaseabundancesofHCOOH. Previouslylaboratoryicespectrahavebeenstudiedforpu re HCOOH and mixtures of HCOOH with H O andor CHOH by Schutteet al. and HudsonMoore . These studies only focused on specic spectral features. The data clearly showed that the morphology and composition of the ice matrix strongly inuence the HCOOH infrared spectrum. Recentlyexperimentshavebeenreportedforthelayeredic esys S.E.Bisschop et al.Infraredspectroscopy of HCOOHinint erstellarice analogues temHCOOHHOinwhichtheinteractionofHCOOHandH O in the interface is studied see e.g. CyriacPradeep Bahret al. Souda . There is a clear need to understand the spectroscopy of the main ice constituents such as HCOOH as new observa tional tools become available for the study of infrared feat ures of interstellar ices such as the Spitzer Space Telescope t he Stratospheric Observatory For Infrared Astronomy SOFIA and the James Webb Space Telescope JWST. Solid HCOOH islikelymixedwithspeciessuchasH OCOCO andCH OH that are abundant in the ice and have related formation mecha nisms. Infrared ice features of mixtures with these species have beenstudiedinthispaper.PureHCOOHismeasuredaswellfor comparison.Quantitativeandqualitativeanalysisofthe .m .m andotherHCOOH ice featuresallowsfor a betterdeter minationoftheamountofHCOOHpresentininterstellarices as well asitsiceenvironment. The paper is organized as follows Sect. explains the ex perimental method Sect. the analysis techniques Sect. dis cusses theresults ofexperimentswith pureices aswell as m ix tures with H O CH OH CO and CO in Sect. the eects of ice matrix and temperature on the band strength are pre sented Sect. discusses the physical aspects of the intera ctions ofHCOOH inthesolidstate withotherspeciesSect.presen ts the astrophysical implications and nally Sect. summari zes themainconclusionsofthispaper. . Experimentalprocedure The experiments are performed in a high vacuum HV setup with a base pressure of Torr that has been previously described in detail by Gerakineset al. . A CsI window mountedinclosethermalcontactwithaclosedcycleHecryos tat is situated at the center of the chamber. It is used as a substr ate holder and can be cooled down to K. The sample tempera ture is controlled to better than . K using the cryostat cold nger a resistive heating element and a Lakeshore tempe r ature control unit. The system temperature is monitored by t wo KPtype thermocouples . Au in Fe versus chromel one mountedonthesubstratefaceandthesecondclosetotheheat er element. Ices are grown in situonto the substrate by exposing the cold surface to a steady ow of gas that is introduced into the chamber via an all metal ow control valve with a modied outlet directed at the substrate center along the surface no rmal. The ices are monitored by Fourier Transform Infrared FTIR absorption spectroscopy with cmspectral resolution cover ingthecmrange. To test the eect of dilution of HCOOH purity J. T. Baker by H O deionized four mixtures are prepared in a glass vacuum manifold. Both HCOOH and H O are further puried by subsequently freezing and thawing the samples in the vacuum manifold. The mixture ratios range from the rel ative abundances derived from observations of interstella r ices of to see e.g. Gibbet al. to more HCOOHrich ices with relative HCOOHH O concentrations up to . The astrophysical motivation for these higher mixture rati os is that other species such as CH OH are present in solid state environments with nearly equal amounts of H O andor CO Ehrenfreundet al. Dartoiset al. . The d if ferent HCOOHH O mixtures that are used here are summa rized in Table . A pure H O sample is prepared for com parison. Furthermore some features of the solid CO band can be explained with mixtures or layers of CO with non hydrogenbondingmoleculesorwith hydrogenbondingspec iesTable .Overview of ice morphologies total ice exposure and depositiontime. HO HCOOH X Total exposure Deposition time L min CO CO CH OH CO CO CH OH other than H O e.g. Tielenset al. Pontoppidanet al. Fraser et al. in prep.. Accordingly we have also stu d ied a set of binary mixtures of HCOOHX and tertiary mix tures of HCOOHH OX where X stands for CO .pu rity Praxair CO purity Praxair or CH OH . purity Janssen Chimica are prepared with concentrations of andrespectively.Thesemixturesarecho sen such that the matrix species determine the structure of t he ice. Uncertainties on the concentrations of the ice constit uents areduetoinaccuraciesinthepressurereading.TheCO isotopologueis used to distinguish solid COfrom regular at mosphericgasphaseCO . A typical experiment starts with taking a background spec trum at K. Subsequently the ices are deposited with a ow of.Torr s. An exposure of . Torr s corresponds to Langmuir L or equivalently mono layer ML sassuming that the molecular surface density is molecules cmand the sticking probability is at K. The deposition times and total exposures are summarized in Table . After deposition FTIR spectra are taken at K and subsequently every K for binary mixtures of HCOOH with HO or CO and every K for all other mixtures up until a temperatureof K is reached. At each temperaturethe sam plestabilizesforminutesbeforeaspectrumis recorded. OnepureHCOOH experimentis performedwhereHCOOH isdepositedatK.Theaimofthisexperimentistodetermi ne whether the HCOOH ice structure depends on the deposition temperatureandwhetherpotentialphasechangesare revers ible. Subsequently the experiment is cooled down to K and from thenonFTIRspectraaretakeneveryK duringwarmup. . Datareductionand analysis The spectral range from cmis very rich in absorp tionfeaturesof complexorganicspeciesand HCOOH isno ex ception. Consequently special care has to be taken in the dat a reduction.Dependingonthemixturedi erentfrequencyranges areusedtotthirdorderpolynomialbaselinesseeTable .An additional local baseline is subtracted in the cm frequency range. This is necessary as the HCOOH SCO mode around cm.m overlaps with the BOH mode of H O at cm.m. This H O feature is much weaker than the HCOOH feature even when only of HCOOH is present but it is responsible for a wing on the SCO band. Finally a correctionis made on the BOHCH feature around cm.m as it is close to a variableS.E.Bisschop et al.Infraredspectroscopy of HCOOHininte rstellarice analogues Table .Frequencyrangesusedforbaselinesubtraction. Icecomposition Baseline range cm HCOOH HCOOHH O HCOOHCH OH HCOOHH OXa HCOOHCO HCOOHCO aXCOCOor CHOH. Table .Frequencyrangesusedforintegrationbounds. Vibrationalmode Wavenumber cm HCOOH SCO BOHCH SCO HO SOH lib backgroundfeature. Spectra that comprise only the backgro und feature are subtracted from the sample spectra for each temp er ature but due to its variability the subtraction does not f ully removetheartifact. The absolute band strengths are di cult to calibrate in our experiment because the number of molecules that stick to th e substrate sample is not exactly known. Instead we focus in this paper on the relative band strengths that can be accurat ely measured. The relative values discussed here can be combine d withpreviouslymeasuredvaluesforthebandstrengthsavai lable from the literature summarized in Table . The absolute ba nd strengthsforthevibrationalmodesdependonwhetherHCOOH is in the gas phase or solid state and consequently the number s inthetable donotperfectlymatch. To determine the relative band strengths the SCO BOHCH andSCO features of HCOOH as well as the BOH and libration lib bands of H O are integrated over the frequency ranges given in Table . The integra tion boundaries for H O are identical to those used recently byObergetal. . Since the BOH band at cm .m and the OCO bending mode BOCO at cm .m of HCOOH overlap with the H Olib band at cm.m these two featuresare subtractedbeforein tegration. TherelativebandstrengthsoftheHCOOHandH Ospectral features are calculated with respect to pure HCOOH and H O via AHCOOH H OY AHCOOHYintegraltext bandIHCOOH H OY integraltext IHCOOH. Here Y is the HCOOH ice fractionintegraltext bandIHCOOH H OY the integrated absorbance of the band in the mixture AHCOOH the band strength for pure HCOOH ice at K andintegraltext IHCOOH the integrated absorbance for pure HCOOH ice at K. A similar formula is used for H O. The resulting relative band strengths arestudied as a function of temperature see Sect. . An extens ive discussion of the uncertainties of the band strengths is giv en byObergetal. . In short the largest fraction of the uncertainties arises from inaccuracies on the mixing ratio of the ice and yields relative uncertainties that are below . Additionally baseline subtraction and deposition time in accu racies are to . A conservative approach yields an overall uncertaintyofintheresultingcalculationsfortherelative band strengths. Furthermore it is important to note that th e relative uncertainty between di erent temperatures for a single experiment amounts to as only baseline inaccuracies contribute. Observed temperature trends are thus much more certainthanconcentrationdependencies. TheSCOBOHCH andSCO bands of HCOOH arettedwithGaussianlineprolesfortheastrophysicall ymost relevant cmrange. To t the asymmetric prole of theSCO stretch around cmtwo components are needed. It turned out to be di cult to disentangle the proper ties of the absorption bands of HCOOH in some mixtures in particular those containing CO and CO . In such cases average peakpositionsaregiven.Ingeneraltheuncertaintiesofpe akpo sitions and FWHMs are cmand cm except for the BOHCH feature in the HCOOHH O mixture where thevaluesarecmandcmrespectively. . Results The following section summarizes the results for the pure an d mixed HCOOH ices at di erent temperatures. All spectra are availableathttpwww.strw.leidenuniv.nl labdatabases. .. Pure HCOOH ices Clearly the pure HCOOH ice spectrum shown in Fig. for K is complex. For completeness we summarize the spec troscopic assignments for all bands here see Table but i n this paper we mainly focus on the astrophysically relevant f ea turesSCOBOHCH as well asSCO. The measured peakpositionsandFWHMsintheastrophysicallyrelevant cmrange are given in Table A. of the online material. The features at cm cm and cm. .m are all due to the OH stretching mode SOH. The broad structure with di erent maxima of these modes are as signed to a combination of dimers and HCOOH organized in long chains CyriacPradeep . The SOH bands over lap with the cmCH stretchSCH. In observations these bands overlap with and are dominated by the m HO band.Theastrophysicallyimportant SCObandhasits max imumaroundcmandisbroadandasymmetric.TheCO stretchSCOislocatedatcm.Furthermorebending S.E.Bisschop et al.Infraredspectroscopy of HCOOHinint erstellarice analogues Table .SummaryvaluesabsolutebandstrengthsforHCOOH fromtheli terature. Ice matrix SCOSCOBOHCH cm moleculecm moleculecm molecules HCOOHa. . HCOOHH O b . HCOOHH Oc. . . HCOOHH Oc. . . aLaboratorygas phase data by Marechal . bLaboratorysolidstate data by Hudson Moore . cTheoretical calculations by Park Woon . Table.SolidstatespectralfeaturesforHCOOHH OCOCO andCH OHatK.Thesymbols SandBindicateastretching orbendingmoderespectively.Thegasphasespectroscopic labelisindicatedaswell.Theastrophysicallymostreleva ntfeaturesof HCOOH aremarkedinboldface. Wavenumber Wavelength Mode Label Comment cm m HCOOH . SOH has several submaxima . SCH . SOH has several submaxima . SOH has several submaxima . SCO outofphase between adjacent chains . SCO inphase between adjacent chains . BOHBCH . SCO . BCH outofplane . BOH outofplane . BOCO HO . SOH a . BOH . lib CO . SCO CO . overtone . overtone . SCO . BOCO CHOH . SOH . SCH . SCH . CH deformation andBOHb . CH rock . SCO . torsion arefers tothe symmetric stretching mode and tothe antisymmetric stretching mode of H O. bandare antisymmetric deformations is a symmetric deformation of CH OH andisthe OH bending mode for CH OH. modes are present of which BCH andBOH at cm andcm.and.mrespectivelyareoutofplane. The temperature evolution of the astrophysically relevant HCOOH features in the cmrange is shown in Fig. a and the corresponding peak positions are given in Table A. of the online material. Most features are broad and consist of multiple components at K. At K the SCOSCO andBOHCH modes at and cmsplit into two components. The splitting of the SCO andSCO bands is assigned to the outofphase and inphase motions of di erent HCOOH molecules within thesamechainCyriacPradeep.Theoutofphasemo tions are located at higher wavenumbers than the inphase mo tions. TheSOH andSCH inplane bending modes over lap at K but are clearly observed as two separate peaks at higher temperatures. Our results are consistent with those of CyriacPradeep who assigned the splitting to a con versionofHCOOH dimerstoHCOOH organizedin chainsfol lowingand experimentalstudy by Millikan Pitzer an d calculationsbyYokoyamaet al. . In one experiment HCOOH is deposited at K see Fig. b. After deposition the spectrum is similar to that of HCOOH depositedat K and subsequentlyheatedto K. When the temperature is lowered to K the general featuresS.E.Bisschop et al.Infraredspectroscopy of HCOOHininte rstellarice analogues Fig..Experimentalinfrared spectrum of pure HCOOH ice de posited at K. The SOH band has several submaxima in the cmrange whereSCH is also located. Below cmthe following absorption features are present the CO stretching mode SCO the CO stretch SCO the CH bending mode BCH the OH bending mode BOH and OCO bending mode BOCO. Peak positions and labels are given in Table . In this study the focus is on the SCO BOHCHandSCObands. remain similar to the high temperature spectrum. Upon subse quent heating to K an exact copy of the original K spectrum is obtained. Thus the changes in ice matrix struct ure afterheatingareirreversible. .. HCOOHH Oices Experiments with mixtures that range from to HCOOHH O have been performed. In Figure c the tempera ture evolution of the mixture with of HCOOH is shown. Peak positions and FWHMs for the cmrange are given in Table A. of the online material. The dilution of HCOOH in H O clearly aects the band proles of HCOOH. TheSCO band shifts cmto the red at K and the BOHCH feature is narrower than in pure HCOOH. Between and K both the peak intensity and FWHM of the BOHCH band increase. At K the H O features change due to a phase transition from amorphous to crystalline H O ice structure. At the same time the SCOBOHCH and SCO modes of HCOOH split into two components. Finally at K allH OandmostHCOOH havedesorbed. Thespectrafordierentmixtureconcentrationswithrespect to HO are shown in Fig. for K left and K right. TheSCO band has an additional component at K in HCOOHH O mixtures with high HCOOH concentrations that is located at lower wavenumbersand is due to the inphase mo tionbetweenHCOOHmoleculesinthesamechain.Thisimplies that there is a small fraction of HCOOH ice that is in a bulk HCOOH environment.The pure HCOOH componentdecreases with increasing H O concentration. The BOHCH andSC OmodesconsistofonecomponentandtheirFWHMsdecrease forlowerHCOOH concentrations. At K theSCOBOHCH andSCO modes are split into two peaks for the three mixtures with the highe st HCOOHconcentrations.The BOHCHmodeisbroadercom paredtopureHCOOH.AtthelowestHCOOHconcentrationnoFig..Absorption spectra for temperatures of K left and K right in the cmrange for HCOOH de posited at K the HCOOHH O mixtures and HCOOH de posited at K. The BOH band of H O has been removed fromthespectra. splittingoftheSCOspectralfeatureofHCOOHisobserved but only a broad band with a FWHM of cm. Furthermore theSCO band is shifted to cmand theBOHCH featureislocatedat cm. .. HCOOHCO HCOOHCO andHCOOHCH OH ices Figure shows the e ects dierent species have on the solid state HCOOH infraredspectrum. Tables A. and A. of the on line material summarize the prole parameters.HCOOH mixed with H O results in a relatively simple spectrum but mixtures withotherspeciesespeciallyCOorCO showmultiplecompo nents. In mixtureswith CO or CO theSCO band is shifted to higher wavenumbers of which the two most prominent fea turesare located at cmand cmin both mixtures. AfeatureispresentatcmfortheSCObandwhichis assigned to monomericHCOOH. Thisband is especially strong in the HCOOHCO mixture. In CH OH the absorption bands morecloselyresembletheoverallfeaturesofmixtureswith HO. However theSCO andSCO modes are split into two componentsatcmandcm.TheBOHCHband cannot be compared to that in the other mixtures as it overlap s withandisdominatedbytheCH deformationandBOHfea turesofCH OHat cm. ThetemperaturebehaviorofthespectralfeaturesofHCOOH ice depends strongly on the matrix species. In mixtures with HO the HCOOH bands are similar for all temperatures. This is not surprising as the H O ice structure does not change until K. HCOOH behaves di erently in mixtures with CO and COat high temperatures however. When CO has desorbed at K theSCO andSCO features are similar to pure HCOOH.Furthermoreitsintegratedintensitydoesnotdecr ease after CO desorption. In the mixture of HCOOH with CO the cmand cmbands of HCOOH only fully disap pear between K and K at the same time that the features for pure HCOOH start to appear and after CO has desorbed. ThusevenwhenHCOOHispresentasaminorcomponentinCO or COit doesnot codesorbat low temperatures.The HCOOH bandsinCH OHhavea similar lackoftemperaturevariationas for mixtures with H O. Between and K CH OH has a S.E.Bisschop et al.Infraredspectroscopy of HCOOHinint erstellarice analogues Fig..The temperature dependent spectra of a pure HCOOH ice depos ited at K b pure HCOOH ice deposited at K subsequentlycooleddown to K and c HCOOHH O mixed ice. The spectra of the ices are shown for andK.The BOHbandofH OatcmhasbeenremovedfromthespectrafortheHCOOHH O mixture. Table . The peak positions FWHMs and relative band strengths ofBOHCH at K of tertiary mixtures of HCOOHH OX where X stands for CO CO and CH OH. The uncertainties on the peak positions and FWHMs are cmandcmrespectively. Mixture Peakposition FWHM AA cm cm HCOOHH OCO . HCOOHH OCO . HCOOHH OCHOH . phase transition that is observed around cmwhere both theCH deformationandBOHmodesofCH OHarelocated. TheHCOOHSCOandSCObandsdonotresemblepure HCOOHfeaturesatKwhichindicatesthatbothspeciesar e still mixed. .. Tertiarymixtures Spectra of tertiary mixtures of HCOOHH OCO HCOOHH OCOand HCOOHH OCHOH have been mea sured at K. In Table and Table A. of the online material peak positions and FWHMs are given. The SCO andSC O features are similar to those in mixtures with H O but are shifted by a few wavenumbers.The BOHCH bandis located atlowerwavenumbersespeciallyfortheHCOOHH OCHOH mixtureandhaveFWHMs of cm... Comparisonto previouslaboratorydata Prior to this study only Schutteet al. and HudsonMoore reported infrared spectra of HCOOH mixtures with H O and CH OH at and cmresolu tion respectively. Their experiments only focused on the BOHCH andSCO bands and consequently it is di cult to make a full comparison with our data which also includes other HCOOH bands. The peak positions of the BOHCH features in pure HCOOH ice and HCOOHH O mixtures by Schutteet al. are shifted and the FWHMs are narrower compared to our data. However the tertiary HCOOHH OCHOH mixture results agree very well within the experimental uncertainties. These discrep ancies are likely due to a di erent baseline subtraction. In pure HCOOH and mixtures with H O theBOHCH mode has a wing on the blue side which is not subtracted in the present work. The peak position and FWHM for the SCO feature for a HCOOHH O mixture byHudson Moore arethesame withintheuncertainties. . Band strengthchangesin icemixtures AsstatedbeforeinSect.absolutebandstrengthsaredi cultto measure in our experiment whereas the relative band streng ths can be accurately determined. The relative values discusse d in this section can be used in combination with existing values in the literature given in Table to derive absolute band stren gths indierentice environments.S.E.Bisschop et al.Infraredspectroscopy of HCOOHininte rstellarice analogues Fig..Absorptionspectrainthecmregimeformixtureswith H OCOCO andCH OHatbottomcurve and K top curve. The BOH has been removed for the HCOOHH O mixture. The peak positions of pure HCOOHatKareindicatedbythedottedlines.Theintensiti esofthebandsaremultipliedbyafactorfortheHCOOHH Oand HCOOHCO mixturesasindicatedintherst andthirdpanelrespectiv ely. Fig..AAHCOOH with respect to temperature for the HCOOHSCOBOHCH andSCO bands in HCOOHH O. Thesymbols refer to the mixture to squareto Diamondto HCOOHH O andto pureHCOOH. Notethedi erentscalesontheverticalaxes. .. HCOOH When HCOOH ice is mixed with H O the band strengths of HCOOH are strongly a ected. In Figure the relative bandstrengthsoftheSCOSCOandBOHCHspectralfea tures are shown with errorbars of superimposed. Clearl y theuncertaintiesarerelativelylargebutstillitisposs ibletonote a numberofeects with concentrationandtemperature.As dis cussedin Sect. the errorbarsin the sameexperimentatdi er ent temperatures are only and observed temperature tren ds arethusmuchmoreaccuratethanconcentrationtrends. All mixtures with H O show a similar temperature trend as pure HCOOH. Even though between and K the SCObandsplitsits bandstrengthisconstantwithtempera ture.Incontrastthatofthe SCOfeatureshowsapronounced dip around K which is partly recovered at K. For the most diluted mixture where chainformationdoes not occur no such dip is present. The band strength of the BOHCH mode increaseswithtemperatureandpeaksatK.Astrikingdi er encebetweenthethreeabsorptionbandsisthatthebandstre ngth increasesbyafactortowithdecreasingHCOOHiceconcen tration for theSCO andBOHCH bands but is the same withinforthe SCOfeaturein all mixtures. A similar comparison for the relative band strength with re spect to temperature is made for mixtures with CO CO and CHOHseeFig..ThebandstrengthsinmixtureswithCOare higher compared to those in pure HCOOH even when all CO has evaporated. However the band strengths in CO are close to or smaller than those for pure HCOOH. The SCO and SCO modes are largest around K decrease between K and nally increase again up to K. The SCO S.E.Bisschop et al.Infraredspectroscopy of HCOOHinint erstellarice analogues Fig..AAHCOOH with respect to temperature for the HCOOHSCOBOHCH andSCO bands. The square symbols refers to pure HCOOH Diamondto HCOOHH O to HCOOHCO to HCOOHCO andto HCOOHCH OH.Notethedierentscalesontheverti calaxes. andSCO bands are relatively little a ected in the mixtures withCH OH. The relative band strengths for the BOHCH mode in the tertiary mixtures are shown in Table and those of the other bands in Table A. of the online material. Clearly the band strength in the tertiary mixtures with H O and CO CO or CHOH areenhancedat K. In summarythe relative band strengths of the SCO and SCO bands can range from . AHCOOH and of the BOHCH band from AHCOOH in dierent ice envi ronments. .. HO Water absorptionbandsare strongly a ected by the presence of other ice componentslike CO Obergetal. . In Figure therelativebandstrengthscomparedtopureH OoftheSOH and thelib modes in the mixtures with HCOOH are shown versus temperature. The SOH band strength is signicantly smaller in all mixtures compared to that of pure H O but does not dependon the mixing ratio. The lib mode behavesdi er ently. It decreases as a functionof HCOOH concentrationwi th the smallest band strength for the highest HCOOH concentra tions. As the temperatureincreases the relative bandstren gth of thelibbandincreasesuntilatemperatureofKisreached . The dierent behavior ofSOH and thelib mode are fur ther illustrated in the right panel of Fig. . For pure H O the absorbance ratio ASOHAlibthe .m features starts at. and increases with temperature to .. The mixtures have a higher ratio at K but decrease with temperature. Th e ASOHAlibratiofurthermoreincreaseswithHCOOHconcen tration at K. In conclusion the ratio of the relative band strengths of the . m features with a value larger than implies that H O is present in ice with HCOOH concentrations andalowervalueimpliesthattheHCOOHconcentration is.Fig..AAHO of the H OSOHlib and the band strength ratio ASOHAlibwith respect to temperature in HCOOHH O mixtures and pure H O. The dotted line with in theASOHAlibpanel indicates the trend for pure H O the for the mixture for squarefor andDiamondfor HCOOHH O. Note the dierent scales on the vertical axes. . Discussion In this section our results are discussed in the light of rec ent chemical physics experiments of HCOOHcontaining ices. Th e behavior of HCOOH in di erent ices may lead to important clues regarding the behavior of the species under interstel lar conditions. Of particular relevance for interstellar chem istry is the mobility in the ice and desorption behavior of the ice con stituentswithtemperature. The infrared spectrum of pure HCOOH distinguishes itself fromHCOOHmixturesbythepresenceofdimerstoachainlike structure of HCOOH molecules at K for HCOOH de posited on a KBr substrate at K see e.g. CyriacPradeep . The chainstructure at higher temperatures results in a spectrum in which the SCO andSCO bands are split. The transition from dimers to HCOOHchains is irreversible as evidenced by the splitting of the SCO mode at K for HCOOH depositedat K seeFig.andSect. .. In binary mixtures with H O the HCOOH ice spectral fea tures remain relatively similar throughout a large tempera ture regime.OnlyfromKonwardschangesareobservedforour experiments see Fig. . Initially only the BOHCH mode increases in intensity and broadens but between K and K theSCO band splits into the outofphase and in phasemodesforHCOOHsimilartowhatisobservedfor pure HCOOH ice. This implies that the molecules rst reorga nizelocallyatKandsubsequentlybecomemobilethrough out the ice at highertemperatures.Thisis corroboratedby s tud ies of layered binary HCOOHH O ices CyriacPradeep Borodinetal. Bahret al. Souda . In addition to the infrared experiments by CyriacPradeep Metastable Impact Electron Spectroscopy MIES an d Temperature Programmed Desorption TPD have been used to probe the layered HCOOH HO ices. No mixing is observed in anyoftheseexperimentsuptoK.Furthermorethesplitt ing of theSCO mode between K and K in our experi ments implies that H O and HCOOH segregate at high temper atures.ThisisconsistentwithTPDdatafromBahret al. S.E.Bisschop et al.Infraredspectroscopy of HCOOHininte rstellarice analogues where HCOOH desorbs after H O even in ices where H O has beendepositedontopofHCOOH. The interactions between HCOOH and CO CO and CHOH are dierent compared to H O. Very little has been published about either dimers or ice mixtures of these speci es. Parketal. performed experiments with HCOOH dis solved in liquid CO and CH. The dimermonomer ratio for HCOOH was higher in C Hthan CO . This is due to the stronger electrostatic interactions of HCOOH with CO com pared to C H. A similar eect may be responsible for the dif ference between CO and CO as the monomeric HCOOH fea tureatcmisstrongerinthemixturewithCO compared to CO. When HCOOH is diluted in an ice dominated by other molecules with no or very small dipolemoments like CH N and O a similar HCOOH ice spectrum is likely obtained. The monomerdimer ratio will depend on the HCOOH concentra tion as well as the strength of the electrostatic interactio n be tween HCOOH and the other ice species. A similar behavior is observed for H O ice diluted in CO CO N and Oe.g. Obergetal. Bouwman et al. in prep. Awad et al. in prep.. The CH OH spectrum is very little a ected by HCOOH. This is probably due to a comparable strength of hydrogen bonds between HCOOH and CH OH. The infrared spectra of HCOOHCH OH mixtures shown in Fig. clearly il lustratethatbothspeciesdonotsegregateattemperatures below KevenwhenCH OHhasaphasetransition.Itislikelythat HCOOH and CH OH only become mobile between K and K as is found for mixtures of HCOOH with H O. Since CHOHhasasmallerdipolemomentandfewerpossibilitiesfor making hydrogenbonds compared to H O it is also expected to segregate from and desorb prior to HCOOH. Other polar or hydrogenbondingspecies such as NH and HCO may interact withHCOOH anda ectitsinfraredspectruminthesame way. . Astrophysicalimplications .. HCOOH iceidentication Formic acid ice has been observed in many di erent astrophys ical objects such as high mass and low mass starforming re gions e.g. Schutteetal. Boogert et al. in pr ep.. In this section we compare the laboratory spectra with the ob served ISO spectrum toward the low mass YSO HH and the highmassYSOWABoogertetal.Gibbetal.. The.m SCO.m BOHCHand.m SC Obandsareusedtodeterminethetheiceenvironmentinwhi ch HCOOH is located. The . m HCOOH feature is blended with other interstellar bands and the . m band overlaps with the wing of a strong silicate feature. Nonetheless they can b e used to exclude some astrophysical HCOOH ice environments. InFigurethe mrangeisshowntowardthelowmassYSO HH with the experimental spectra overplotted. In Figure a the spectra for the HCOOHCO and HCOOHCO mixturesare shown.Thesemixturescan clearlybe ruledout f or HHbecausethe SCOfeatureisshiftedtoofartotheblue. Similarly pure high temperature HCOOH Fig. b can be dis cardedas the outofphase SCO modeat . m band is not detected. Furthermorefor all pure ices and mixtures excep t the binary HCOOHCH OH ice theSCO band causes a small wing on the silicate band at . m which is not observed due tothemuchlargerintensityofthesilicate absorption. The integrated absorbance and peak position is determined most accurately from the BOHCH band because it is theFig..Theobservedicespectruminthe.. mrangeto wardWAindicatedbythesolidlineGibbet al..Als o included are in a the spectra at K of pure HCOOH dotted and HCOOHH O dashed and in b the tertiary mix turesHCOOHH OCOdashedHCOOHH OCO dashdotandHCOOHH OCHOHdot ted. least blended feature of HCOOH. In Figure the spectrum ob served with ISO toward W A is shown for the BOHCH feature. The ISO data are chosen for comparison because they have higher spectral resolution or cmat .m than the Spitzer data or cmat .m. In Figure a the K spectra of pure HCOOH and HCOOHH O are shown. Clearly the pure HCOOH ice spectrum is too broad to t the astronomical feature. The BOHCH mode is also too far shifted to the blue for the HCOOHH Omixture.ThetertiarymixturesdepictedinFig.b match the observationsbetter. The HCOOH spectral features in the HCOOHH OCO and HCOOHH OCOmixtures are al most identical but have a blue wing that is not observed for WA.HowevertheHCOOHH OCHOHmixture reproducestheobservedspectrumverywell. This sensitivity of peak position and FWHM of the BOHCH band at .m is further illustrated in Fig. together with the observed values toward the high mass YSO W A. A Gaussian t is made to the observations in the same way as to the experimental data. The black horizontal line co r responds to the tted peak position in the observations and the black vertical line to the tted FWHM. The dotted and dashed lines represent cmand cmerrorbars for the FWHMandpeakpositionrespectively.Clearlythebinarym ix tures with H O as well as pure HCOOH are too broad and shifted too far to the blue side compared to the observed fea ture in W A. The tertiary mixtures provide better ts. The HCOOHCO HO and HCOOHH OCO mixtures have FWHMs that are too broad compared to the ob servationswithintheiruncertainties.Furthermorethei rpeakpo sitions are shifted to cm a few wavenumbers too high. Potentially CO COHO ratios higher than .. could shift theBOHCH feature to lower wavenumbers and match the observations toward W A better. This is not unlikely as Obergetal. nd that they can t the observed Spitzer spectrumtowardHHwellifalsoa.CO HOmixtureis included. The .m band for the HCOOHCH OHHO mix turetstheobservedspectrumverywell. S.E.Bisschop et al.Infraredspectroscopy of HCOOHinin terstellarice analogues Fig..TheobservedicespectrumtowardHHinthe mrangeBoogertet al..Alsoincludedareinaarethe mixturesofHCOOHCO dotdashandHCOOHCO dashedinbpureHCOOHspectraatKforicedepositedat Kdot dash and at K dashed in c the mixtures of HCOOHH O dashdot and CH OH dashdotdotdot and in d the tertiary mixtures of HCOOHH OCO dashdotdotdot HCOOHH OCOdashed and HCOOHH OCHOH dotdashat K. TherelevantpeakpositionsofpureHCOOH iceat K areindicatedwithdottedlinesto guidetheeye. .. HCOOH iceformation The presence of HCOOH in a complex mixture dominated by HO but also including CO CO or CHOH or a combination of these three species is not unlikely when potential format ion mechanism are evaluated. CO or CO are both potential pre cursors to HCOOH and CH OH is known to form from CO through Hatom bombardment Watanabeet al. Fuchs et al. in prep.. Hbombardment of CO or CO in mixtures with HO Fuchs et al. in prep. Bisschop et al. in prep. and UV irradiationofCOH O andCO HO mixturesWatanabeet al. WatanabeKouchi Gerakinesetal. donot give HCOOH as one of the main products. Since the UV ex periments were performed under HV conditions they need to be repeated under ultra high vacuum conditions to fully ex clude this route. In H OCO mixtures that are bombarded by . MeV protons to simulate cosmic rays HCOOH is formed HudsonMoore .Itsformationisexplainedby HCOHCO OHHCOHCOOH where the H and OH result from H O dissociation in the ex periment. In space Hatoms from the gas phase can react with the adsorbed O to form OH. HCO is formed by H addition to CO which will further react to H CO and nally to CH OHunless HCO encounters an OH radical rst. GarrodHerbst use this formation mechanism for HCOOH in the solid state. Howeverin their model HCOOH can onlyformat higher temperatures because the OH and HCO radicals are not mobile at low temperatures. This would be inconsistent with the det ec tion of HCOOH ice in cold sources such as HH and back ground stars unless OH is produced with excess energy. This i s forexamplefoundintheoreticalcalculationsbyAndersson et al. forthephotodissociationofH Oice.Thenewlyformed OH radicalsare notverymobile in bulk ice but can movemore than over the surface. Thus HCOOH formation through this reaction mechanism is expected to be strongly localize d at theicesurface.Anotherpotentialformationmechanismisg iven byKeane. HCOOHCOO HCOOHHCOOH In this case successive H and Oadditionleads to HCOOH for mation and HCOOH may be produced at low ice temperatures at thesametime asH OandCH OHareformed. In summary both reaction pathways make it likely that HCOOH is formed in an environment where H O and CH OH are located. Potentially CO CO and H CO are present in the iceaswellifconversiontoCH OHandHCOOHisincomplete.S.E.Bisschop et al.Infraredspectroscopy of HCOOHininte rstellarice analogues Fig..Comparison between the observed . m band of HCOOH in W A with laboratory spectra of HCOOH ice. The black lines indicate the peak position and FWHM of the observed feature and the dotted and dashed lines cm uncertainties on the FWHM and cmon the peak po sition respectively. Mixture ratios for all temperatures have the same symbol. The symbols refer to pure HCOOH to HCOOHH Osquareto HCOOHH Oto HCOOHH OCODiamondtoHCOOHH OCO andto.HCOOHCH OHHO. As discussed in Sect. . it is probable that H CO will have a similar eect on the ice structure as CH OH and H O and thus also on the HCOOH infrared bands. In the future both reac tionpathscanbetestedexperimentallyandthusresolvewhe ther HCOOH is formed during ice formation ice processing at low temperaturesorpotentiallyevenboth. . Summaryand conclusions Themainconclusionsderivedfromthisworkare The peak positions FWHM and proles of the SCO BOHCH andSCO bandsare strongly a ected by the ice matrix. At high temperatures and when HCOOH is de posited at high temperatures the SCOBOHCH and SCO modes split into two bands. In binary mixtures with H O the HCOOH features have very simple proles whereasmultiplebandsarefoundinbinaryicemixtureswith CO CO and CH OH. The peak positions of the HCOOH SCOBOHCH andSCO bands are shifted up to cm. The spectra for tertiary mixtures resemble the spectraofbinarymixtureswith H Obut smallshiftsexist. The band strengths of the SCOBOHCH andSC O features are strongly a ected by the ice structure. They are enhanced in mixtures of HCOOH with H O and CO by factorsofbut aresimilar to thoseof pureHCOOH ice for binary mixtureswith CO and CH OH. Strongtempera tureeectsarealsoobserved. Comparisonofourdata with the Spitzer spectrumof HH andtheISOspectrumtowardthehighmassYSOWAex cludes the presence of the high temperatureHCOOH chain structure as well as binary mixtures of HCOOH with any oftheotherspeciesH OCOCO andCH OH.The.m featuretowardWAisverysimilartothatfoundintertiary mixturesofHCOOHH OXwhereXstandsfor CO CO or CHOH. Especially the HCOOHH OCHOH mixturereproducestheobservedWAspectrumverywell.Potentiallysuchtertiaryorevenmorecomplexicesconsis t ingofHCOOHH OCHOHCOandCO mayberespon sible for the observed spectrum. The presence of HCOOH in such complex ice mixtures is consistent with its possible formationmechanisms. Acknowledgements. We thank the referee for useful comments on the pa per. Funding was provided by NOVA the Netherlands Research School for Astronomy and by a Spinoza grant from the Netherlands Organ ization for Scientic Research NWO. 