 We announce the discovery of an extrasolar planet XOb that transits a bright V. star. With an or bital period P. days planetary radius Rp. RJ and planetary mass Mp. M J XOb be longs to the growing class of transiting Hot Jupiter HJ planets Charbonneau et al. . Despite the increasing number of transiting planets known much work still remains to understand the observed prop erties of planets. The transiting planets HDb Charbonneau et al. and HATPb Bakos et al. have anomalously large radii compared to theoreti cal models and are thought to require an external source of energy to remain inated Bodenheimer et al. Guillot Showman Winn Holman . How ever recently Burrows et al. explain the radii of transiting planets without the need for an extra source of energy by accounting for enhanced metallicity opaci Electronic address cjburkestsci.edu Space Telescope Science Institute San Martin Dr. Bal ti more MD Dept. of Physics and Astronomy Rice University Main Street MS Houston TX Boston University Astronomy Dept. Commonwealth Ave.Boston MA Inst. for Astronomy University of Hawaii Woodlawn Dr . Honolulu HI Racoon Run Observatory Pleasanton CA Volunteer Observatory Knoxville TN Vermillion Clis Observatory Kanab UT Esteve Duran Observatory Foundation Montseny Seva Spain Hereford Arizona Observatory Hereford AZ Campo Catino Astronomical Observatory Guarcino Italy Virtual Telescope Project Bellatrix Astronomical Observ a tory Ceccano Italy CBA Belgium Observatory Landen Belgiumties and properly comparing observed radii to theoret ical radii. In contrast HDb has an extremely high density and small radius Sato et al. . There is general agreement that explaining the small radius of HDb requires a massive central core Mc M of heavy refractory elements Sato et al. Fortney et al. . Disentangling the eects of stellar irradiation mi gration central core mass and composition on the observed properties of planets requires discovering more bright transiting planets Charbonneau et al. Fortney et al. . XOb is the second contribution to the bright transiting planet sample provided by the XO Project McCullough et al. XOb being the rst McCullough et al. . Of the bright transiting planet hosts V XO has the highest metallic ity FeH. see .. In addition from a recent catalog of extrasolar planets Butler et al. XO has a higher metallicity than of all known extrasolar planet hosts. Metallicity plays a crucial role in the formation of plan ets and the resulting HJ atmospheres. The frequency of radial velocity detected planets is known to increase with metallicity Fischer Valenti . In the core accretion planet formation model a high metallicity en vironment grows larger cores and enables more objects to reach the critical mass necessary for runaway gas ac cretion and transformation into a detectable gas giant planet Ida Lin Benz et al. . Detailed ts to the mass and radius of the known transiting planets yields a mass estimate for the central refractory element core Guillot et al. Burrows et al. . These in vestigations derive a larger core mass for planets that transit higher metallicity stars. In addition to the bulk properties of extrasolar planets metallicity plays an im portant role in the planets atmosphere especially for a HJ experiencing large stellar irradiation. An increased metallicity results in a greater absorption of the stel lar irradiation and larger equilibrium temperatures than a comparable planet of lower metallicity Fortney et al. . The variations in equilibrium temperature can lead to variations in the dominant observable features in the planets atmosphere. Amongst the other transiting HJ planets XOb shares a common characteristic with another transiting HJ HATPb Bakos et al. . Both planets orbit one member of a nearlyequalmass wide separation stel lar binary. The XO stellar binary system has a sepa ration of AU separation with a distance of pc and both components have an identical within the uncertainties mas yrproper motion vec tor as measured with Tycho Hg et al. and the high proper motion catalog of L epine Shara . It is not unusual for planets to exist in binary systems. Raghavan et al. nd of stars with planets have a stellar companion however they nd evidence that the extrasolar planet sample is decient in stellar bi naries when compared to the eld. A stellar companion with a AU separation is not expected to inuence the planet formation process. Even assuming an orbital eccentricity e. for the unknown eccentricity of the XO stellar binary planets within ac AU of XO are dynamically stable Holman Wiegert we as sume the current measured projected binary separation is close to the actual semimajor axis of the orbit when calculating ac. Empirically Desidera Barbieri do not nd any statistically signicant dierence between planets around single stars and planets in wide a AU separation binaries. However understanding the inuence of a stellar companion on the planet formation process is complicated by the fact that the binary con guration during planet formation may be vastly dier ent than what is currently observed Marzari Barbieri Malmberg et al. . The similar brightness of the XO stellar binary com ponents and their angular separation provides an ex cellent opportunity for detailed line abundance stud ies. The higher metallicity of the known planet host stars is thought to be of primordial origin rather than heavy element pollution due to infalling planets Fischer Valenti Gonzalez . The infalling planet model for explaining the higher metallicity of the known planet host stars has predominately come from observations showing diering element abundances be tween common proper motion binary components. These element abundance dierences have typically been over turned by further independent analyses Gonzalez . The diculty in reliable abundance dierences results from systematic eects in analyzing stars of dierent Teff and evolutionary state Schuler et al. . Such eects are reduced for the XO stellar binary. On the sky XO and a line joining its stellar com panion has a position angle of which lies nearly di rectly in the NorthSouth direction see the nder chart in Figure . XO is the Northern component of the binary indicated by the arrow in Figure . The mag nitude dierence between the components is V . mag. Thus in the optical XO is fainter than its South Fig. . Finder chart for XO and its stellar companion at two epochs. The arrow indicates XO. North is toward the top of the gure and East is toward the left of the gure. Left Digital Sky Survey POSS I Red image from . Right MASS Hband image from . The common proper motion is predominately directed South. ern companion. The traditional nomenclature for binary stars designates XO as XOB and the planet XOBb. However throughout this article we simply designate the transiting HJ stellar host XO and the planet around it XOb. When it is unclear from the context we al ternatively designate XO as XON and the Southern stellar companion as XOS. We adopt this naming con vention because the magnitude dierence between the stellar components is small and the spectra are nearly identical both of which make it dicult to distinguish the objects whereas the separation readily distin guishes the stellar components based on declination. We refer to both stellar components as a unit as the XO stellar binary. In we provide details of the discovery and follow up photometry and spectroscopy. The high resolution spectroscopy is analyzed in . to determine the stellar properties of XON and XOS. The high precision pho tometry is analyzed in . employing a minimization approach in addition to an ecient Markov Chain Monte Carlo MCMC algorithm to determine the properties of XOb. We conrm the planetary mass of XOb with radial velocity measurements in .. The ephemeris for XOb is rened and the transit observations are inves tigated for transit timing variations in .. There is a brief discussion regarding the XO stellar binary and its Galactic orbit in and we summarize the article in . .OBSERVATIONS ..XO Project Photometry XOb is the second transiting planet discovered by the XO survey after XOb McCullough et al. . McCullough et al. and McCullough Burke describe the instrumentation operation and analysis in more detail than the summary provided here. The twin mm XO cameras power drift scan in dec lination over a deg deg strip every ten minutes on clear nights for more than months per season of visi bility. The XO observations employ a broad . m to .m passband. The star XO comes from the XO strip centered on RA . hr and is one of several thou sands of bright V stars monitored in this strip over the period September to September . The Boxtting Least Squares algorithm BLS Kov acs et al. was employed to search the nearly observa tions per star for repetitive transit events with periods ranging from P . day. We perform the transit search on two realizations of the light curve. One re Fig. . Discovery phased light curve from the XO Project data. Top The phased light curve around the transit event. Bottom The phased light curve over the full orbital period. The indi vid ual measurements points are shown binned solid line to reduce noise. The transit occurs at t . day and any secondary eclipse for a circular orbit would occur at t . day dotted line. No secondary eclipse is evident above the noise. At the res olution of the XO cameras both components of the XO stella r binary are within the photometry aperture causing dilution of the transit depth. alization is the calibrated light curves as described in McCullough et al. and the other realization of the light curve has the SysRem algorithm Tamuz et al. applied to the calibrated light curve in order to fur ther remove systematics. In the case of XO there were no substantive improvements in the light curve quality after implementing SysRem and both analyses identied the same transit period and phase. McCullough Burke describe the selection of transit candidates for followup. In addition for consid eration the candidates must pass selection criteria as de scribed in Burke et al. . In brief we require ob servations covering more than . transit events avoid . and . day periods where systematic aliases result in falsepositive detections require the transit depth m . mag and require the transit to have higher signicance than systematic errors as measured by the transit to antitransit Ratio Statistic RS of Burke et al. . Figure shows the XO light curve phased on the de tected period as returned from BLS. We achieved . or . mag per observation precision on this V. object. The transit occurs at t . day and any sig nature of a secondary eclipse would occur at t . day for a circular orbit. At the angular resolution of the XO survey both components of the XO stellar binary are within the photometry aperture leading to transit depth dilution. Light curves resolving the components of the XO stellar binary result in twice the transit depth see Figure but in the discovery light curve the tran sit depth is . mag. With the XO cameras we ob served two nearly complete transits of XOb at the end of and beginning of Julian dates and . In addition on seven other nights XO cam eras captured partial ingress and egress events. First occurrence of a partial transit was at the end of on Julian date . Table provides a sample of the photometry for XO from the XO cameras. The full table is available in the online edition. ..Extended Team and Follow Up PhotometryFig. . Binned light curves from the Extended Team for XO. The color of the text in the lower left corner indicates the da te observer and passband of the observations. The pas sband labels are Johnson for the system except Clrindicates unltered observations and BBindicates a blue blocking .m lter. The Extended Team E.T. provides photometric fol low up for XO candidates. The E.T. R. B. M. F. C. F. E. GM.B. G. P. H. F. M. G. M. and T. V. is a collaboration of professional and amateur astronomers McCullough et al. . We sent the candidate list containing XO to the E.T. on January . On January E.T. observations conrmed the transit events for XOb in the Rband using a .m telescope solid green line in Figure . The initial ob servations were truncated due to high air mass but the observations conrmed the XO ephemeris the transit oc curs in the Northern star of the XO stellar binary and the undiluted transit depth is consistent with a planetary radius and the XO photometry. A complete transit was observed by the E.T. on January and the binned Rband light curve obtained with a .m telescope is shown as the solid red line in Figure . The light curves shown in Figure are used for rening the ephemeris and looking for evidence of transit timing variations in .. Based on observations of other transit candidates by the E.T. repeat transit events in the same passband have a . or . mag standard deviation in deriving the transit depth. At this level of precision the E.T. observations of XOb are consistent with a gray tran sit. Table provides E.T. photometry for XO. For the E.T. light curves the median dierential magnitude out of transit provides the ux normalization and the stan dard deviation out of transit provides the uncertainty in the measurements. On February we observed a transit event of XOb with the .m Perkins Telescope at Lowell Ob servatory using the PRISM instrument in imaging mode Janes et al. . The PRISM camera is a x Fairchild CCD with .pix resolution. The transit event was well positioned in the evening occurring over the airmass range . lessorsimilarXlessorsimilar.. To improve eciency a subframe containing XON and XOS was read out with a s cadence. The average seeing during the course of observations was poor for the site. The nal light curve is a dierential light curve for XON using XOS as the comparison shown in Figure employing aperture photometry and an Rband lter. The selected aperture size for photometry minimizes the resulting rms scatter in the dierential light curve. In addition to the Rband photometry photometry in the BVI passbands Fig. . Light curve from the .m Perkins Telescope at Low ell Observatory in the Rband points for XON using XOS as the comparison star. The open symbols show the dierentia l photometry in the B diamond V triangle and I square pass bands using the average of the BVI observations obtained bef ore the transit for the ux normalization level dotted line . Accurate positioning of the stellar image on the detector was not main tained during the BVI observations resulting in . or . mag sy s tematic osets. However accurate positioning of the stell ar image on the detector was maintained during the Rband light curve re sulting in . mag rms over minute intervals. Also shown is the bestt transit model for xed M .Msolid line . was obtained before the transit at midtransit and after the transit. The gap in the Rband data at midtransit accommodates the multiple lter data. A computer fail ure resulted in the gap of Rband data at the start of ingress. To normalize the dierential light curve the average magnitude from out of transit data was subtracted from the light curve. This was done independently for each half of the light curve separated by the midtransit gap. There is a m . magnitude dierence in the nor malization zeropoints between the data before and after the transit. This oset results from repositioning the telescope and refocusing for the BVI data acquisition at midtransit. During an uninterrupted Rband data se ries a . pix rms positional accuracy was maintained resulting in . mag rms over minute intervals. Accurate positioning was not maintained for the BVI data resulting in . mag osets between the data obtained before and after the transit. The average BVI passband data before transit was subtracted from the BVI data obtained at midtransit and after transit to yield the dierential light curve in these passbands as shown in Figure . Within the systematics resulting from repositioning of the stars on the detector the transit is gray. We obtained photometric B V R C and I Cmagni tudes for XON and XOS using a .m telescope on the photometric night of January Table . A single Landolt area Landolt was observed at the same airmass as XO to derive the zero point and color transformation coecients. The color transfor mation coecients were consistent with comprehensive standard star measurements from four Landolt elds ob tained two weeks previous using the identical instrumen tal setup. The color range of Landolt standards was .BV.. The B V R C and I Cabsolute photometric accuracies are . . . and . mag r.m.s. including both the rms scatter around the photo metric transformation model and an estimated system atic error. The Tycho magnitudes for XO listed inTable transform via Table of Bessell to John sonV . i.e. . mag fainter than our es timate. In addition we accurately measured the instru mental magnitude dierence between XON and XO S. We nd XON is fainter than XOS by . . mag in the Bband . . mag in the Vband .. mag in the Rband and . . mag in the Iband. ..Spectroscopy After conrmation of the XO transit light curve from E.T. observations see . we initiated queue schedule observations of XON and XOS with the HighResolution Spectrograph HRS a ber fed cross dispersed echelle spectrograph Tull on the McDonald Observatory m HobbyEberly Telescope HET in order to measure the mass of the planet. The rst HRS observations using an iodine gas cell for pre cision radial velocities commenced on January . Table provides dates of the HRS observations along with the resulting radial velocities. The instrument setup provides R resolution and wavelength coverage over the range Awith center at A. We extracted the twodimensional echelle spec tra using procedures described in Hinkle et al. . The resulting SignaltoNoise ratio SNR varied from per extracted pixel at the blaze peak. We calcu late radial velocities for XON and XOS in .. To measure the stellar parameters of XON and XO S we also obtained spectra with the dCoud e echelle spectrometer Tull et al. on the McDonald Obser vatory .m Harlan J. Smith Telescope HJS. We ob tained two spectra of XON and a single spectrum of XOS with R and wavelength coverage of A. We determine the stellar parameters in .. .ANALYSIS ..Stellar Properties We use the Spectroscopy Made Easy SME analysis package of Valenti Piskunov with renements from Valenti Fischer on the HJS spectra to measure the stellar properties of XON and XOS. We briey describe the process here. The free param eters of Teff logg MH vsini NaH SiH TiH FeH and NiH are varied in order to minimize the dierence of the resulting synthetic spectrum to the ob served spectrum. A quadratic continuum is t over wavelength intervals for each unique set of the above free parameters. When generating the synthetic spec trum the pressuretemperature prole of the atmosphere comes from interpolating the atmosphere grid of Kurucz . The atomic line list comes from the Vienna Atomic Line Database VALD Piskunov et al. and the molecular line list comes from Kurucz . The line strengths and van der Waals damping parameter of the line list database were adjusted to improve agree ment with the observed solar spectrum as described in Valenti Fischer . Table lists the stellar parameters for XON and XO S based on the SME analysis. The results for XON are based on the average from two spectra and the results for XOS are based on a single spectrum. Both XO N and XOS independently result in a metal enhanced abundance FeH. .. Using the primary ob servables from the SME analysis Teff abundances and logg and the apparent magnitude in the Vband . we determine secondary stellar properties MR dis tance and age using the Yisochrones Yi et al. following the procedure of Valenti Fischer . The distance to XO is unknown thus the probability den sity function for MR and age are calculated for a sequence of trial distances in steps of pc. The SME isochrone analysis for select distances to XO are listed in Table . We determine a distance d pc to XO in.. from a joint analysis of the SME analysis and transit light curve. The spectrum alone yields an estimate of the stel lar gravity log gsme. Estimates of MandRfrom the isochrone analysis provide an additional estimate of loggisoas a function of distance to XO. The condition loggsmeloggisoyields an approximate distance to XO . The data for XOS provides a consistency check and ideally the condition log gsmeloggisofor XOS is met for the same distance as XON. In practice we nd XO S has log gsme . too large a value for log gisoto ac commodate at any distance. Also XOS being brighter and thus more massive than XON implies log gsmefor XOS should be lower than log gsme . of XON opposite of what is measured. Evidence that log gsmefor XON is correct and the re sulting log gsmefor XOS is overestimated is as follows. As we show in .. the independent determination of loggfor XON based on the transit light curve is in excellent agreement with log gsme. The SME based log g can result in higher values than the Yisochrones al low for some objects in the Spectroscopic Properties of Cool Stars SPOCS catalog as a result of the numerous degeneracies that exist between the spectral parameters see Figure of Valenti Fischer . Comparing stars analyzed with SME in common with other inde pendent spectral analyses does not reveal an oset in loggsee Figure of Valenti Fischer . The uncertainties in the stellar parameters given in Table are based on the typical rms scatter in parameters mea sured in independent multiple spectra for stars in the SPOCS catalog. Based on the uncertainties in Ta ble the dierence in log gbetween XON and XOS is signicant. However the distribution of repeat measure ments for parameters in the SPOCS catalog see Table of Valenti Fischer display extended wings and the Gaussianbased uncertainties underestimate the possibility of outlying measurements. Thus we also pro vide the . condence intervals for the parameters based on Table of Valenti Fischer . Since the XOS parameters are based on a single spectrum the . condence interval is more appropriate than rely ing solely on the error when deciding on the signi cance of any dierences between the properties of XON and XOS. We show the probability density for the XON pa rameters in Figure for the preferred distance to XO of pc. We perform a combined analysis of the stel lar parameters from the SME analysis and light curve to derive the best stellar and planet properties in ... ..Light Curve Analysis Mass MsunProbability . . .. . . Msun XON Radius RsunProbability . . . .. . . Rsun XON loggProbability . . . .. . . XON Age GyrProbability . . . Gyr XON Fig. . Distributions for four stellar parameters derived from the SME analysis see text for a distance of pc. The value s of the mean and limits containing of the distribution from the mean are annotated on the gures and listed in Table alon g with corresponding values for distances of pc and pc. Using the stellar properties from the SME analysis see . and the transit light curve from the .m Perkins Telescope see . we model the transit light curve jointly with the SME stellar properties to determine the parameters of XO and radius of XOb. In the follow ing subsections we rst determine the system parame ters from the light curve using a Maximum Likelihood minimization method assuming xed Mand employing theoretical limb darkening coecients. Then we further rene the system parameters and their uncertainty by marginalizing over the unknown limb darkening param eters and using a prior on Mfrom the SME analysis using a Markov Chain Monte Carlo MCMC method. ... Maximum Likelihood Analysis of the Light Curve In Figure we show the MandRparameter space for XO allowed by the SME analysis. The horizontal error bars delimit the credible intervals for the mass of XO. Each error bar corresponds to an assumed dis tance to XO as labeled in Figure . The ordinate loca tion for each error bar is given by the best estimate of R for XO as determined from the SME analysis for the as sumed distance. The SME analysis constrains the stellar mass of XO to a narrow range M ..Min dependent of the distance. First we determine the XO and XOb system parameters at xed M .M. We perform a minimization using data obtained at the .m Perkins Telescope from February shown in Figure . To obtain limb darkening coecients we interpolate in the table of the quadratic limb darken ing law coecients from Claret . Using the spec troscopically determined iron abundance log g andTeff we nd u . and u .. The limb darkening coecients are held xed throughout the minimization. With Rp orbital inclination i and time oset from the XO ephemeris as free parameters and the assumption of a circular orbit we minimize the dierence be tween observations and the analytic transit model from Mandel Agol . To estimate errors for the data points we calculate the sample standard deviation for groups of measurements i.e. roughly minute inter vals. There is a linear trend in the resulting error esti mates that ranges from . mag to . mag over the course of the observations with error estimates rang ing from . . mag. Given the roughly constant trend in the error estimates as a function of time we adopt uniform errors . mag for all measurements. Table lists the resulting bestt system parame ters and their errors. For the best set of parameters min with degrees of freedom for a reduced .. This suggests our errors are underestimated the model limb darkening coecients is inappropriate or the assumption of independent Gaussian noise is incor rect. We assume the former is plausible since increasing the scale of errors by achieves . We quantify the impact of allowing the limb darkening parameters to vary in ... We scale the error estimate for the observations to ensure when deriving the error on each parameter. We determine the error on each parameter by varying an individual parameter while allowing the other parameters to minimize un til min Press et al. . Ras measured from the transit light curve t enables estimating the distance to XO and age of XO by em ploying the results from the SME isochrone analysis. We interpolate the stellar radius versus trial distance to XO relationship given by the SME isochrone analysis. The estimated distance to XO and its error follows directly from the interpolated result at the minimization esti mate for Rand its error. The best age for XO follows the same procedure as for the distance i.e. for a given stellar radius estimate the SME isochrone analysis has a best age estimate for the system. To further visualize the surface over the range of MandRfor XO we perform a gridbased t to the light curve over the grid . R .Rand . M .Mwith steps in R . and M .. The limb darkening coecients are xed at the theoretical estimate throughout the calculation. Figure shows the and condence intervals min. . and . respectively in theMRgrid as the nearly horizontal solid lines. The constraint on Rfrom the transit photometry is nearly perpendicular to the constraint on Mprovided by the SME analysis of the spectra. Figure illustrates each constraint with hatched lines the crosshatched region is the intersection of the two constraints and indicates the joint condence interval on MandRfor XO. Also shown as the dashed lines is the spectroscopically measured log gfor XO and its condence intervals as labeled. The measured log gsmeis consistent with the condence intervals from the light curve constraints. In the following subsection we describe a Bayesian method for analyzing the XO light curve and SME spectra data and we relax the assumption of xed limb darkening coecients and M. By keeping track of the likelihood e. during the Bayesian calculation we approximate the resulting XO and XOb parameters derived from the Maximum Likelihood minimization method presented in this subsection. Table provides full results for both the method and MCMC method for incremental increase in the number of free parametersFig. . Constraints on the mass and radius of XO. The nearly horizontal solid line shows the condence intervals for the parameters of XO from tting the transit light curve shown in Figure . The connected horizontal error bars represent the lim its on the Mof XO at xed Rfrom the SME isochrone analysis. The label on each error bar provides the assumed distance to X O in pc. The independent measurement of log gfrom the SME analy sis dashed line labeled XO log g agrees with the log gestimated from the light curve t. The hatched lines delineate the con straints for the light curve and spectra analysis. The cross hatching is the intersection of the two constraints and indicates the joint condence interval on MandRof XO. for the light curve model t. The dotted vertical lines in Figures show the uncertainties on parameters that result from the minimization method and enable their comparison to the uncertainties from the MCMC method solid vertical lines. A discussion of the dierences be tween the two analysis methods is given in the following subsection. ... Markov Chain Monte Carlo Analysis of the Light Curve In summary a Bayesian analysis updates the prior probability of a hypothesis to a posterior probability of the hypothesis that includes the information provided by the data as quantied by the likelihood Posterior Probability Prior Probability Likelihood. The resulting posterior probability is a probability den sity for the parameters of interest given the observed data. Bayesian analysis has been applied to determin ing the system properties for transiting extrasolar plan ets Holman et al. and for radial velocity extra solar planets Ford Gregory b. In a mul tidimensional problem the MCMC algorithm is an e cient means of calculating the posterior probability. Ford provides a thorough discussion of the theory and a practical MCMC implementation for radial velocity planet detection. Qualitatively a Markov Chain is a se ries of samplings from parameter space. A random i.e. Monte Carlo step from the current sample to a trial sam ple is taken. A selection function based on the posterior probability decides whether to accept this trial sample or maintain the current sample as the next step of the chain. In the end the distribution of samples in the chain converges to the posterior probability of interest. Holman et al. determined the system parame ters for XOb McCullough et al. with a MCMC Bayesian approach. The set of parameters they investi gated were stellar radius R planet radius Rp orbital inclination i and the two coecients of the quadratic Fig. . Correlation between parameters for samples in a MCMC calculation of the XOb posterior distribution for a xed stellar mass M .M and stellar limb darkening coecients u . and u .. When using the parameters RRp andi the parameters are tightly correlated and the Rpversus i correlation is nonlinear Top. With the choice of parameters R and the correlations between parameters are linear Middle . Solving for the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix from s amples shown in the Middle Panel yields an eigenbasis set of paramet ers Lower . The eigenvector along the direction of largest variance eis predominately along R. Eigenvectors eandeare a mix ture of and. The multinormal without covariance properties of the eigenbasis set of parameters provides a more ecient MCM C calculation. limb darkening law. In the transit tting problem the re lationship between RRp andihas a high degree of de generacy and nonlinearity. We illustrate the degeneracy and nonlinearity between parameters in the top panels of Figure for a MCMC calculation of the XOb poste rior distribution maintaining xed mass M .M and xed limb darkening coecients u . and u .. The points in Figure are samples from the MCMC. The nonlinear bananashaped degeneracy be tween Rpandislows the rate of convergence for MCMC algorithms. MCMC algorithms work eciently when the relationship between parameters is multinormal without covariance Kosowsky et al. . To remove the nonlinearity between parameters we choose a dierent base set of parameters RRpR and transit duration P aarcsinparenleftBigg R abracketleftbigg aR cosi cosibracketrightbiggparenrightBigg where Pis the orbital period ais the semimajor axis and we have assumed zero eccentricity. With this nonlin ear transformation the degeneracy between the new base set of parameters is along a straight line as shown in the middle panels of Figure . A further linear transforma tion between parameters nally yields the simple multi normal without covariance relationship that results in an ecient MCMC calculation. To determine the necessary linear transformation we determine the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix built from a trial chain performed in the base set of parameters Tegmark et al. . This is equivalent to a Principal Component Analysis. The bottom panels in Figure show trial samples in terms of the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix. The eigenvec tor along the largest variance e is predominately along R and eandeare a mixture of and. Care must be taken to properly assign prior prob abilities for a nonlinear transformation in parameters Chu et al. . In particular a uniform prior in iisnot the same as a uniform prior in . The transformation law of probabilities provides the necessary prior probabil ity to maintain the uniform prior in RRp andifor our chosen base set of parameters. We initially investigate a uniform prior in ito enable comparison with our mini mization. We subsequently implement a prior uniform in cosias appropriate for the distribution of iexpected for random orientations of the orbital plane and we nd a negligible dierence in the resulting parameters between the two choices of prior for ias expected since i. The general transformation law with multiple dimensions states py y ...dydy...px x ...vextenddoublevextenddoublevextenddoublevextenddoublex x ... y y ...vextenddoublevextenddoublevextenddoublevextenddoubledydy... where the original joint probability distribution px x ...dxdx... is transformed into another prob ability distribution in terms of the new set of variables y y ... by multiplication with the absolute value of the Jacobian determinant bardblbardbl. The new yvari ables must have the same number and be expressible in terms of the old xvariables Press et al. . Writing the old variables in terms of the new variables RR RpR and i arccosradicalBigg Ra sin sin where P the Jacobian matrix is written bardblbardblvextenddoublevextenddoublevextenddoublevextenddoublevextenddoublevextenddoublevextenddoubleR R R R Rp RRp Rp i Ri i vextenddoublevextenddoublevextenddoublevextenddoublevextenddoublevextenddoublevextenddouble where we have indicated the trivial elements with value one or zero. Overall the Jacobian simplies to Rpi PRsinradicalBigg Ra sinRa . With our base set of parameters the proper prior to maintain uniform priors in the original parameters is the above Jacobian multiplied by the original joint probabil ity distribution for uniform priors which is a constant. To solve for iin Equation we use the rootsolving method of Muller as implemented in IDL. The prior probability goes to zero for max where maxParcsin Ra . We employ the MetropolisHastings algorithm with a normal proposal distribution for calculating the Markov Chain. We follow a Gibbslike sampling technique where each step in the chain consists of a number of intra steps updating each individual parameter in turn. Several short trial chains iteratively yield scale factors of the normal proposal distribution for each parameter with a to acceptance rate for the trial samples. The autocorrelation of samples in the MCMC sequence is one method to quantify the eciency of the calculation. With the original set of parameters RRp and i the correlation length when the autocorrelation drops by half in the Rparameter varied N cor steps. Using our new set of parameters R and N cor steps. Finally with the eigenbasis pa rameters N cor steps where the correlation is measured in the physical variable R. The above corre lation lengths come from the calculation described next. We rst calculate the posterior distribution for the pa rameters of XO and XOb with the MCMC algorithm as described above at xed stellar mass M .M and xed stellar limb darkening coecients u . andu .. This is identical to the problem we solved with the minimization method in ... The likelihood function is given by e. were we have as sumed the errors are normally distributed and the data have uniform weights. is the squared dierence be tween observations and the analytic transit model of Mandel Agol . The observations are the Rband data from the .m Perkins Telescope shown in Figure . The calculation has four free parameters R andto where tois the midtransit time oset from the ephemeris with a period given by the XO observations and a midtransit zeropoint near the midtransit gap of the light curve HJD .. Our prior is given by Equation which is equivalent to a prior uniform in R Rpi and to. The priors for R and tohave cut o values well beyond values allowed by the data. The prior on has an upper limit cuto max. A trial chain in the base parameters is necessary to dene the covariance matrix and the eigenbasis set of parameters. OnlyR and enter into the covariance matrix. We ndtoshows no signicant correlation with respect to the other three parameters. The trial chain has a length Nchn steps. The nal estimate of the poste rior probability comes from independent chains with dierent initial conditions using the eigenbasis parame ters each with Nchn giving an eective length NeffNchnNcor after taking into account the correlation length Ncor . Using these chains the largest GelmanRubin statistic amongst the parameters R. where R . indicates convergence of the chain Gelman Rubin . Figure shows the resulting posterior probability dis tribution for each parameter after marginalization over the other parameters. The posterior probability is sim ply a normalized histogram of the MCMC sample values. The mean median or mode are all valid single point es timates of the posterior probability. The mode of the posterior probability yields parameters most consistent with the maximum likelihood parameters from a min imization. The arrow point along the abscissa in Figure indicates the mode of the posterior probability. To de rive an credible interval for a parameter the MCMC samples are separated into two groups on each side of the posterior mode and sorted. The Nth lowsample from the group of sorted samples below the mode denes the lower limit of the credible interval where Nlowis the number of samples in this group. The Nth highsample from the group of sorted samples above the mode denes the upper limit of the credible interval where Nhighis the number of samples in this group. The vertical solid lines in Figure show the . credible interval. The best parameter values and credible intervals are given in Table . By keeping track of the likelihood value e. at each MCMC sample it is possible to approximate aFig. . Marginalized posterior probability for the XO and XOb parameters from MCMC samples assuming xed stellar mass M .M and xed stellar limb darkening coecients u . and u .. We adopt the mode of the posterior probability arrow as the point estimate of the parameter. The solidlines indicate the . credible interval. The dotted lines indicate the condence intervals estimated from the MCMC samples that approximate uncertainties from a minimization method. Only single sided intervals are given for the orbita l incli nation parameter. condence interval based on a specied interval. With good sampling the MCMC sample with the largest likelihood Lmax in each bin of the posterior probability histogram approximates minimizing at the abscissa value of the bin. To determine the condence interval limits we spline t the sequence of Lmaxas a function of the parameter of interest. A condence inter val is determined for the parameter value resulting in Lmax . corresponding to . The verti cal dotted lines in Figure represent the condence intervals determined from this process. In the next calculation we include the stellar limb darkening coecients as free parameters. We model the limb darkening with the quadratic law I u u where Iis the specic intensity normal ized to unity at the center of the stellar disk and is the cosine of the angle between the line of sight and the surface normal. We assume uniform priors for the limb darkening coecients with the following physically mo tivated limits on the parameters. We require the high est surface brightness to be located at the disk center u. require the specic intensity to remain above zero uu. and do not allow limbbrightened proles uu.. We follow Holman et al. by adopting au uanda uuas the parameters used in the calculation. This linear combina tion of limb darkening coecients reduces their mutual degeneracy. The trial chain to determine the covariance matrix was length Nchn . Ria and a were included in the covariance matrix. The nal esti mate of the posterior probability comes from indepen dent chains each with Nchn giving Neff. Using these chains the largest GelmanRubin statistic was R.. Figure shows the marginalized posterior probabil ity allowing the stellar limb darkening coecients to vary. This results in a smaller star smaller planet and shorter duration than for the xed limb darkening coef cient case. The condence intervals are systematically oset from the Bayesian credible intervals. In this in stance a analysis results in a smaller Rpthan the Fig. . Similar to Figure but showing the marginalized posterior probability for the XO and XOb parameters fro m MCMC samples assuming xed stellar mass M .M and variable stellar limb darkening coecients. Fig. . Joint posterior probability for the stellar limb dark ening coecients uanduLeft and RanduRight. The solid contours are isoprobability contours containing and of the MCMC samples. The remaining of the samples lying outside the region of highest probability are also shown points . The set of limb darkening coecients that minimize diamond diers from the theoretically calculated limb darkening co ecients triangle . The prior limits for the limb darkening coecients are indicated with dashed lines . Bayesian mode of the marginalized posterior probability. The marginalized posterior probability will dier in gen eral from the likelihood. For instance the marginalized posterior probability will dier if an informative prior is employed. Also the process of marginalization itself can result in a posterior probability dierent than the likelihood. This is because the marginalized probabil ity includes the eect of the amount of parameter space available at each point Lewis Bridle . To illus trate this point we show the joint posterior probabil ity for Randuin the right panel of Figure . The open diamond indicates the best set of parameters which minimize . The best parameters are in a corner of allowed parameter space. Even though the likelihood is highest at R. there is a wider range of allowed parameter space in the uparameter toward larger R. Thus the peak in the marginalized posterior probabil ity is slightly larger R .. The dierence between the results is small but it can be an important factor to take into consideration when comparing datasets or results derived from the two techniques Lewis Bridle . The left panel of Figure shows the joint posterior probability for the stellar limb darkening coecients u andu. The solid contours are isoprobability contours containing and of the MCMC samples. The small points illustrate the remaining of the samples lying outside the region of highest probability. The set ofFig. . Similar to Figure but showing the marginalized posterior probability for the XO and XOb parameters fro m MCMC samples assuming a Gaussianlike prior on stellar mass and variable stellar limb darkening coecients. limb darkening coecients that minimize u . u. open diamond symbol varies from the theo retically calculated limb darkening coecients open tri angle symbol. The dash lines illustrate the prior limits for the limb darkening coecients. The lower dash line in Figure corresponds to not allowing limb brightened specic intensity proles. The bestt transit model in asense from this calculation is compared to the light curve data in Figure . The nal parameter of the system that we investigate is M. In the preceding calculations Mis held xed. The light curve data alone does not constrain M thus we calculate the posterior probability employing the prior onMavailable from the SME isochrone analysis. The form of the prior is a Gaussian where the central value and standard deviation of the Gaussian are a function of R. We employ a spline interpolation over the grid of M andMas a function of Ras shown by the horizontal error bars in Figure . The trial chain to determine the covariance matrix was length Nchn steps. The nal estimate of the posterior probability comes from independent chains each with Nchn giving Neff. Using these chains the largest Gelman Rubin statistic was R.. The resulting posterior probability is shown in Fig ure . The condence intervals from a analysis for RandRpare technically much wider than shown in Fig ure . The condence intervals are limited by the range ofMencountered in the MCMC samples allowed by the SME Gaussianlike prior as shown in Figure . Us ing the SME isochrone analysis we translate the MCMC samples for Rinto distance to XO and age estimates. The posterior probability for these two parameters is shown in Figure . We repeated the last calculation assuming a prior uniform in cos i. The results are given in Table and they do not materially aect the param eter estimates. ..Radial Velocity Measurements We measured the mass of XOb using the radial veloc ity technique. We follow the procedure to determine the radial velocity as described in McCullough et al. . A brief summary is as follows. The spectra obtained with the HET are compared to a model spectrum consisting of a highresolution spectrum of the Sun the Earths atmo sphere Wallace et al. and a highresolution spec Fig. . Similar to Figure but showing the marginalized pos terior probability for the XO parameters from MCMC sample s assuming a Gaussianlike prior on stellar mass and variable stellar limb darkening coecients. The SME isochrone analysis tran slates the posterior distribution for Rinto the posterior distribution for Distance and Age. trum of an iodine gas cell Cochran convolved with a Voigt prole to approximate the linespreadfunction of the instrument. Using a continuum normalization factor radial velocity of the star radial velocity of the iodine lines and an optical depth scale factor as free param eters of the model a minimization yields parame ter estimates for each A section of the spectrum independently. The requirement of strong iodine lines limits radial velocity estimates to the wavelength range A. The mean and its error of the inde pendent radial velocity estimates yields the nal radial velocity measurement at each epoch see Table . Figure shows the resulting radial velocity curve phased with the XOb ephemeris determined from the transits and assuming zero eccentricity. The typical un certainty for each measurement RV m s. The radial velocity semiamplitude K m s. This amplitude results in Mp.. M Jfor XOb as suming M. M for XO and a circular orbit for XOb. The six radial velocities measured for XOS Table are consistent within the observational errors with no radial velocity variation and show no signicant evidence for a HJ orbiting XOS. ..Ephemeris and Transit Timing Variations The database of E.T. transit light curves for XOb en able us to rene the ephemeris for XOb and to quantify transit timing variations from this ephemeris. The tran sit light from the .m Perkins Telescope on February provides a precise measurement of the midtransit zeropoint of XOb. From the best tting transit model in asense during the MCMC calculation at xed M .Mand variable limb darkening coecients we nd the ephemeris zeropoint is . . day. The error s corresponds to the condence interval for the ephemeris zeropoint from a analysis as estimated from the MCMC samples following the pro cedure of ... To rene the orbital period of XOb we calculate mid transit times for the nearly complete transit events ob served with the XO cameras on and HJD and the E.T. transit events shown in Figure . We compare the E.T. transit data with a simplied trape zoidal transit model. The transit model has a constantFig. . a The radial velocity of XO oscillates sinusoidally with a semiamplitude K m s implying XObs mass is .. M J. b The period and phase of the radial velocities were xed at values determined by the transits. The mean stellar r adial velocity with respect to the solar systems barycenter has b een subtracted. In order to determine K we used the HET spectra calibrated with an iodine absorption cell lled circles. c In this representation of the data a circular orbit yields a straig ht line of slopeK. ux decrement between ndand rdcontact with a linear variation in the ux during ingress and egress. Values of andfor the trapezoidal transit model come from the best tting transit model in a sense dur ing the MCMC calculation at xed M .Mand variable limb darkening coecients. The transit model has a ux decrement of when applied to the XO survey data to account for the transit depth dilution caused by the ux of XOS in the photometric aper ture. Table provides the resulting midtransit times. The four independent midtransit estimates on HJD enables estimating the typical uncertainty . min in the transit timing. To rene the orbital pe riod we minimize the dierence between the tran sit timing observations and ephemeris model. We keep the ephemeris zeropoint xed at the value derived from the .m Perkins Telescope light curve. The bestt pe riod . . day results in a min . for degrees of freedom. This suggests there are no signicant timing variations. For the minimization we assumed a uniform error . min on the transit tim ings. This error may be slightly overestimated given the resulting min. The ephemeris for XOb accumulates a min uncertainty by . .DISCUSSION Amongst the various estimates for the system param eters given in Table our preferred system parameters and uncertainties for XO and XOb come from the MCMC calculation of the posterior probability that em ploys the SME based prior on the stellar mass and uni form priors for the other parameters. We show how the mass and radius of XOb compares to the other known transiting extrasolar planets in Figure . Data for the other transiting planets comes from the compilation of F. Pont priv. comm.. We summarize the preferred properties of XOb in Table . The transit candidate of Mandushev et al. illus trates the nonnegligible potential for triple stars to hav e transit light curves and radial velocity variations consis httpobswww.unige.ch pontTRANSITS.htm Fig. . Planet mass and radius for all the known transiting extrasolar planets. For clarity names of planets are abbrev iated. XOXO OGOGLE survey TRTReS WPWASP HPHAT and HDstars with HD numbers. The HD number is abbreviated to the rst three digits i.e. HDHDb. Also shown are isocontours dotted lines for density in g cm. The parameters for Jupiter and Saturn points are also given. tent with a planet. However in the case of XOb our attempts to explain the light curve and spectroscopy with a physical stellar triple fail. We employ the Yisochrone appropriate for the the physical properties of XO sup plemented with the lowmass stellar isochrone between . M . M from Chabrier et al. stellar limb darkening coecients from Claret and the light curve synthesis routine of Wilson to model a stellar triple system. The constraints on the transit duration and transit depth from the light curve require M. M for the primary in a stellar binary blended with the light of XO. The required stellar binary has the ux of XO and has a radial velocity semi amplitude K km s. Such a binary would be read ily apparent in the spectrum of XO given the narrow spectral features for XO vsini . km s. We can not completely rule out the possibility of a lineofsight faint background binary blended with the light of XO as an explanation for the observations. However the sinusoidal shape of the radial velocity variations necessi tate the lineofsight binary to have a systemic velocity similar to XO otherwise the radial velocity curve de velops asymmetries that are not observed Torres et al. . Given the large proper motion of XO ground based adaptive optics or spacebased observations have the potential to denitively rule out a background line ofsight binary. In addition to XO only HATP HD HD HD GJ B HD B and HD Cyg B have V . mag dierence between the stellar binary components Desidera Barbieri supplemented by data from the SIMBAD database and can be considered nearlyequalmass stel lar binaries hosting a known extrasolar planet. In out of the binary systems the planet orbits the lower mass star of the binary. In the remaining systems HD and HD the planet orbits the more massive star but the orbits for these planets have the highest eccen tricities amongst all known planets e. and e. respectively Butler et al. . Equivalently if we re strict the sample of extrasolar planets in nearlyequal mass stellar binaries to modest eccentricity e . in of the known systems the planet orbits the lowermass star. We oer several speculative possibilities to explain the current pattern of planets in nearlyequal mass stellar binaries The pattern arises due to small sample statistics Planets form more readily around the lower mass component of a nearlyequalmass stellar binary Planets form equally likely around the compo nents of a nearlyequalmass stellar binary but planets orbiting the primary component have lower detectability due to lower planet mass or higher orbital eccentricity Cumming . The XO stellar binary has a higher space ve locity with respect to the Local Standard of Rest LSR v UVW kms than most of the other known extrasolar planets Santos et al. Ecuvillon et al. . According to the purely kinematic classication of Bensby et al. and Bensby et al. XO has times higher proba bility of belonging to the Thick Disk than the Thin Disk. From a chemical abundance perspective a metallicity of FeH . is typically the upper limit for Thick Disk metallicities Mishenina et al. Reddy et al. . However Bensby et al. has recently claimed kine matically selected Thick Disk stars with FeH . have a chemical abundance pattern distinguishable from Thin Disk stars at the same metallicity. The sample of stars with kinematics suggestive of the Thick Disk but Thin Disk metallicities like XO is still too small to de termine their relationship to the traditional ThinThick Disk populations. However Mishenina et al. distinguishes between objects with Thick Disk kine matics and Thin Disk metallicity by determining the maximum height above the Galactic disk their orbit attains Zmax. Both the estimate of Bensby et al. for Zmaxand integrating the orbit of XO us ing the axisymmetric static Galaxy potential model of Allen Santillan yield Zmax pc for the or bit of XO. Given the much larger scale height for the Thick Disk TD kpc under the classication of Mishenina et al. XO belongs to the Thin Disk since its orbit is well conned to the Galactic plane. The high space velocity of XO results from high eccentric ity rather than excursions from Galactic plane. Using the simple model from Allen Santillan the orbit of XO has a pericenter within kpc of the Galactic cen ter and apocenter kpc e .. Currently XO lags the LSR by V kmsand is moving away from the Galactic center at U kms. This places XO in phase space near the Her cules stream Famaey et al. Ecuvillon et al. U U VV kms but is lagging the LSR more than the typical Hercules stream member. The possibility that XO belongs to a dynam ical stream originating from the metalrich inner Galaxy is an example that supports the ndings of Famaey et al. and Ecuvillon et al. that compared to eld stars metalenhanced dynamical streams should be over abundant in detectable extrasolar planets. .SUMMARY The star XO GSC hosts an approx imately Jupitersize . Jupitermass transiting extra solar planet XOb with an orbital period . days. XO is a V. early K dwarf with high metallicity FeH. high proper motion tot mas yr and has a common proper motion stellar companion with separation. The followup high resolution spec troscopy yields M.. M for the mass of XO andMp.. M Jfor the mass of XOb. The fol lowup high precision photometry yields R. . . Rfor the radius of XO and Rp. . .RJfor the radius of XOb. Joint analysis of the light curve and spectroscopy yields an isochrone based age of XO t.. .Gyr and an isochrone based distance to XO d pc. The quoted values and their un certainties are Bayesian credible intervals encompassing of the marginalized posterior probability. For the Bayesian analysis we assume a Gaussianlike prior on M derived from the spectroscopic and isochrone anal ysis of XO and uniform priors on RRp orbital in clination and limb darkening coecients. We describe an ecient Markov Chain Monte Carlo method to cal culate the Bayesian posterior probability for the system parameters from a transit light curve. System param eters and condence intervals from a minimization yield the same results within the uncertainties and are also provided in Table . XOb adds to the sample of Jupitermass planets re siding in nearlyequalmass stellar binaries. In of the nearlyequalmass stellar binaries hosting a planet the planet orbits the lower mass stellar component. In the remaining stellar binaries where the planet orbits the higher mass star the planets orbits are highly eccentric e.. Equivalently if we restrict the sample of extra solar planets with modest eccentricity e . orbits in nearlyequalmass stellar binaries in of the known systems the planet orbits the lower mass star. We spec ulate on possible astrophysical reasons for this pattern beyond the simple fact that the statistics are based upon a very small sample and thus may be spurious. With its high proper motion XO has kinematics sug gestive of Thick Disk membership but a Thin Disk metal licity. In contrast to the typical Thick Disk member the high proper motion of XO results from an eccentric orbit Galactic pericenter Rper kpc well conned to the Galactic disk Zmax pc. XO may originate in the metalrich inner Thin Disk and was dynamically scat tered into the solar neighborhood. Similar to the ndings of Famaey et al. and Ecuvillon et al. the discovery of XOb suggests metalenhanced dynamical streams from the inner Galaxy may be abundant in de tectable extrasolar planets. The University of Hawaii sta have made the operation on Maui possible we thank especially Jake Kamibayashi Bill Giebink Les Hieda Je Kuhn Haosheng Lin Mike Maberry Daniel OGara Joey Perreira Kaila Rhoden and the director of the IFA RolfPeter Ku dritzki. The HobbyEberly Telescope HET is a joint project of the University of Texas at Austin the Penn sylvania State University Stanford University Ludwig MaximiliansUniversit at M unchen and GeorgAugust Universit at G ottingen. The HET is named in honor of its principal benefactors William P. Hobby and Robert E. Eberly. We thank the HET nighttime and daytime sup port sta and the Resident Astronomer telescope opera tor we especially thank John Caldwell Frank Deglman Heinz Edelmann Stephen Odewahn Vicki Riley Sergey Rostopchin Matthew Shetrone and Chevo Terrazas. We thank Dave Healy Lisa Prato and Marcos Huerta for assistance observing. We acknowledge helpful dis cussions with Julio Chaname Ron Gilliland and Zheng Zheng. This research has made use of the SIMBAD database operated at CDS Strasbourg France data products from the Two Micron All Sky Survey MASS the Dig itized Sky Survey DSS and The Amateur Sky Survey TASS source code for transit lightcurves Mandel Agol and community access to the HET. XO is funded primarily by NASA Origins grant NNGGGG and the Directors Discretionary Fund of the STScI. REFERENCES Allen C. Santillan A. Revista Mexicana de Astrono mia y Astrosica Bakos G. A. et al. ApJ Bensby T. Feltzing S. Lundstr om I. AA Bensby T. Feltzing S. Lundstr om I. Ilyin I. A A Bensby T. Zenn A. R. Oey M. S. Feltzing S. in ASP Conf. Ser. From stars to galaxies Building the pieces to bu ild up the Universe ed. A. Vallenari R. Tantali L. Portinari A. Moretti San FranciscoASP in press astroph Benz W. Alibert Y. Mordasini C. Naef D. IAU Colloq. Direct Imaging of Exoplanets Science Techni ques Bessell M. S. PASP Bodenheimer P. Laughlin G. Lin D. N. C. ApJ Burrows A. Hubeny I. Budaj J. Hubbard W. B. preprint astroph Burke C. J. Gaudi B. S. DePoy D. L. Pogge R. W. AJ Butler R. P. et al. ApJ Chabrier G. Barae I. Allard F. Hauschildt P. ApJ Charbonneau D. Brown T. M. Latham D. W. Mayor M. ApJ L Charbonneau D. Brown T. M. Noyes R. W. Gilliland R. L . ApJ Charbonneau D. et al. ApJ Charbonneau D. Brown T. M. Burrows A. Laughlin G. Protostars and Planets V Chu M. Kaplinghat M. Knox L. ApJ Claret A. AA Cochran W. FTS Spectrum of I Cell HRS At . C. ftpnsokp.nso.eduFTS cdromFTSR. Cumming A. Marcy G. W. Butler R. P. ApJ Cumming A. MNRAS Deming D. Seager S. Richardson L. J. Harrington J. Nature Desidera S. Barbieri M. AA Dravins D. Lindegren L. Mezey E. Young A. T. PA SP Ecuvillon A. Israelian G. Pont F. Santos N. C. Mayo r M. AA Famaey B. Jorissen A. Luri X. Mayor M. Udry S. Dejo nghe H. Turon C. ESA SP The ThreeDimensional Universe with Gaia Fischer D. A. Valenti J. ApJ Ford E. B. AJ Fortney J. J. Saumon D. Marley M. S. Lodders K. Freedman R. S. ApJ Gaudi B. S. ApJ L Gelman A. Rubin D. B. Stat. Sci. Gonzalez G. PASP TABLE XO Survey E.T. Light Curve Dataa Heliocentric Julian Date Light Curve Uncertainty Filter NbObservatory mag mag . . . W XO . . . W XO . . . W XO . . . W XO . . . W XO aThe complete version of this table is in the electronic editi on of the Journal. The printed edition contains only a sample. bAverage of N measurements Logical Data Analysis for the Physical Sciences A Comparat ive Approach with Mathematica Support Cambridge Cambrid ge University Press Gregory P. C. ApJ Grillmair C. J. Charbonneau D. Burrows A. Armus L. Stauer J. Meadows V. Van Cleve J. Levine D. ApJ L Guillot T. Showman A. P. AA Guillot T. Santos N. C. Pont F. Iro N. Melo C. Riba s I. AA L Harrington J. Hansen B. M. Luszcz S. H. Seager S. Dem ing D. Menou K. Cho J. Y.K. Richardson L. J. Scienc e Hinkle K. H. Joyce R. R. Sharp N. Valenti J. A. Proc. SPIE Hg E. et al. AA L Holman M. J. Wiegert P. A. AJ Holman M. J. et al. ApJ Ida S. Lin D. N. C. ApJ Kosowsky A. Milosavljevic M. Jimenez R. Phys. R ev. D Kov acs G. Zucker S. Mazeh T. AA Kurucz R. L. IAU Symp. The Stellar Populations of Galaxies ed. B. Barbuy A. Renzini Dordrecht Reidel Kurucz R. L. SYNTHE Spectrum Synthesis Programs and Line Data Kurucz CDROM No. Cambridge SAO Janes K. A. Clemens D. P. HayesGehrke M. N. Eastman J . D. Sarcia D. S. Bosh A. S. Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society Landolt A. U. AJ L epine S. Shara M. M. AJ Lewis A. Bridle S. Phys. Rev. D Malmberg D. Davies M. B. Chambers J. E. MNRAS L Mamajek E. E. Meyer M. R. Liebert J. AJ Mandel K. Agol E. ApJ L Mandushev G. et al. ApJ J. Seager S. Barman T. Protostars and Planets V Marzari F. Barbieri M. AA in press astroph McCullough P. R. Stys J. E. Valenti J. A. Fleming S. W. Janes K. A. Heasley J. N. PASP McCullough P. R. et al. ApJ McCullough P. R. Burke C. J. ASP Conf. Ser. Transi ting Extrasolar Planets Workshop ed. C. Afonso D. Weldrake T . Henning San FranciscoASP in press astroph Mihalas D. Binney J. Galactic Astronomy Structu re and Kinematics nd ed. San Francisco W. H. Freeman and Co. Mishenina T. V. Soubiran C. Kovtyukh V. V. Korotin S . A. AA Muller D. E. Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to Computations Neal R. M. Annals of Statistics Nordstr om B. et al. AA Piskunov N. E. Kupka F. Ryabchikova T. A. Weiss W. W. Jeery C. S. AAS Press W. H. Teukolsky S. A. Vetterling W. T. Flannery B. P. Cambridge University Press c nd ed. Raghavan D. Henry T. J. Mason B. D. Subasavage J. P. J ao W.C. Beaulieu T. D. Hambly N. C. ApJ Reddy B. E. Lambert D. L. Allende Prieto C. MNRAS Santos N. C. Israelian G. Mayor M. Rebolo R. Udry S . AA Sato B. et al. ApJ Schuler S. C. Hatzes A. P. King J. R. K urster M. The L.S. AJ Skrutskie M. F. et al. AJ Tamuz O. Mazeh T. Zucker S. MNRAS Tegmark M. et al. Phys. Rev. D Torres G. Konacki M. Sasselov D. D. Jha S. ApJ Tull R. G. MacQueen P. J. Sneden C. Lambert D. L. PASP Tull R. G. Proc. SPIE Valenti J. A. Fischer D. A. ApJS Valenti J. A. Piskunov N. AAS Wallace L. Hinkle K. Livingston W. An atlas of th e spectrum of the solar photosphere from to cm to A Tucson AZ NOAO Wilson R. E. New Frontiers in Binary Star Research Winn J. N. Holman M. J. ApJ L Yi S. Demarque P. Kim Y.C. Lee Y.W. Ree C. H. Leje une T. Barnes S. ApJS TABLE Stellar Properties Parameter XON XOS Reference GSC ID a RA J. hms. hms. ab Dec J. . . ab Galactic Latitude b deg . ... a Longitude l deg . ... a V .. . . c BV .. . . c VR c .. . . c VI c .. . . c VT . . bd BV T . . bd J .. . . e JH .. . . e HK .. . . e Spectral Type KV KV c Distance pc ... c mas yr .. . . b mas yr .. . . b Total mas yr f U Space Velocity km s . ... bcgh V . ... bcg W . ... bcg Stellar Mass M .. ... c Stellar Radius R .. . ... c 